46 NURSING ECONOMIC$/January-February 2018/Vol. 36/No. 1
“ [The] Lack of precise
information about current
costs and utilization of nursing service personnel makes
it difficult for nursing service
administrators and hospital
managers to make the most
appropriate and cost effective
decisions about assignment
of nurses. Hospitals, working
with federal and state governments and other third-party
payers, should conduct studies and experiments to determine the feasibility and means
of creating separate revenue and cost centers
for direct nursing care units within the institution for case-mix costing and revenue setting,
and for other fiscal management alternatives.” (Institute of Medicine, 1983, p. 18)
T HIS SEMINAL RECOMMENDATION by the Institute
of Medicine, now over 3 decades old, identifies a key problem in nursing: How do we put
a dollar value on the services and interventions provided by nurses? Nursing care is essentially
invisible in national payment policy and typically
incorporated into daily room charges. We know very
little about the actual costs of nursing care provided
to each individual patient.
In this article, authors provide an overview of
micro-costing methods and its history and propose a
new approach to costing nursing care in acute care
hospitals. This micro-costing model is based on electronic health record (EHR) data, which identify each
nurse caring for each patient by shift or shorter time
intervals. This information, combined with detailed
measurements of patient acuity, will allow a more
precise estimation of the actual care time each nurse
spends on a patient. The information can then be converted into the cost of nursing care using the nurse
wage and other supplemental costs such as shift differential. In addition, cost data can be aggregated or
allocated in different ways depending on different
administrative or research goals: by patient, demographic characteristic, length of stay (LOS), hospital
unit, or diagnosis-related group (DRG). By leveraging
data already collected for other purposes in the EHR,
the proposed methodology provides more accurate
and transparent cost measurement of nursing care
without additional data collection burden to nurses.
Historical Approaches to Costing Nursing Care
The methods used historically for costing nursing
care were influenced by external policy changes and
data availability. Authors of a large body of nursing
cost studies published in the United States in the
1980s responded to new prospective payment system
legislation (Edwardson & Giovannetti, 1987; Sovie,
1988), which required an estimation of the cost of
care by DRG. The first step in accounting for nursing
costs was selecting a way to aggregate or allocate overall costs of nursing care. The most frequent units of
allocation included day of service, medical diagnosis,
nursing workload, and nursing intensity (Edwardson
& Giovannetti, 1987). The aggregated costs were then
distributed by patient or other units. For instance,
total nursing costs on a given acute care unit divided
by total number of patients derived an average nursing cost per patient per day metric. In a study by
Thompson (1984), relative intensity measures constructed in New Jersey used total nursing costs divided by estimated minutes of nursing care required by
A Micro-Costing or ‘Bottom-Up’ Approach to Measuring
Nursing Costs Using Data from Electronic Health Records
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Nursing costs have traditionally been measured as an
average across many patients and many nursing
services and interventions, hiding the actual costs of
nursing care for each patient.
Improved micro-costing methods that measure individual nursing care time and costs for each patient
are now possible using data from the electronic
health record (EHR).
Application of patient-level micro-costing methods,
using data from the EHR, can provide both improved
costing accuracy as well as additional data for analysis about patients, nurses, nursing skill mix, and cost
of nursing care by diagnosis (e.g., DRG), patient
demographics, and patient outcomes.
JOHN M. WELTON, PhD, RN, FAAN, is Professor and Senior
Scientist, Health Systems Research, University of Colorado College
of Nursing, Aurora, CO; and Nursing Economic$ Editorial Board
Member.
PEGGY JENKINS, PhD, RN, is Assistant Professor, University of
Colorado College of Nursing, Aurora, CO.
MARCELO COCA PERRAILLON, PhD, is Assistant Professor,
Department of Health, Systems, Management & Policy, University
of Colorado School of Public Health, Aurora, CO.
NOTE: This article was supported by grants from the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) 1R03 HS025495-01 and
the University of Colorado School of Medicine Data to Value (D2V)
project.
John M. Welton
Peggy Jenkins
Marcelo Coca Perraillon
John M. Welton
Data, Science, & Nursing Value
NURSING ECONOMIC$/January-February 2018/Vol. 36/No. 1 47
patient. The assumption of this top-down approach is
all nurses provide essentially the same care for each
patient expressed as an average time for all patients
without adjustment for differences in patient need for
nursing care or severity of illness. This top-down
costing approach hides important and clinically
meaningful variation in both patient need for nursing
care and actual care provided by each nurse.
Internationally, healthcare costing and reimbursement policies have used multiple methods to allocate
nursing costs in studies conducted in response to need
for resource management. Methods of allocation
included severity of illness (Park & Song, 1990); workload (Pratt, Burr, Leelarthaepin, Blizard, & Walsh,
1993); direct nursing time per patient observed plus
indirect (Pratt et al., 1993); and per diem charges
(Elliott, 1997). Belgium law requires collection of a
nursing minimum data set since 1988 (Sermeus,
Delesie, Van den Heede, Diya, & Lesaffre, 2008) and
hospital budgets have been adjusted for nursing care
using fixed cost based on staffing ratios plus variable
nursing intensity component (Unruh, Hassmiller, &
Reinhard, 2008).
Micro-Costing Models
In the economic evaluation literature, micro-costing or bottom-up costing, refers to a method of costing
in which each component of resource use (e.g., laboratory tests, drugs, nurse time) is estimated and a unit
cost is derived for each (Drummond, Sculpher,
Claxton, Stoddart, & Torrance, 2015). Although this
definition implies micro-costing involves a detailed
inventory of resources, in practice the term is often
used when efforts are undertaken to measure costs in
a more precise and disaggregated manner. In contrast
to micro-costing, gross costing (or top-down costing)
methods, which measure resources on average and in
an aggregate manner (e.g., cost per hospitalization),
average cost over many diagnoses, or average cost of
staffing over a time period or by DRG (Frick, 2009).
The key distinction between micro-costing and gross
costing is one of precision of estimates, both in terms
of the quantity of resources consumed and their valuation (Gold, 1996). Another distinction is that topdown costing starts with the allocation or aggregation
of costs which are then divided by patient or other
units. Patient-level nursing costs cannot be identified.
Because micro-costing often refers to a more precise estimation of resources used, there is no single
micro-costing methodology. The particular methodology depends on data availability and study purpose.
In a methodological summary of micro-costing methods, Frick (2009) identified some of the most common
ways data are collected in a micro-costing study:
administrative datasets, claims data, forms/time logs,
surveys, patient charts, and direct observation.
Administrative datasets include systems specially
designed to capture resources consumed (Holbrook,
Hargrave, & Traverso, 1996; Traverso & Hargrave,
1995), such as nurse-patient assignment data, or
accounting systems maintained by hospitals (Azoulay
et al., 2007). Claims data may include detailed items
billed or aggregated payments, yet they only include
items that were billed to a payer and may not have a
complete description of resources used or their quantities (Etzioni, Riley, Ramsey, & Brown, 2002).
Nursing costs, and costs in general, are just quantities multiplied by their price (e.g., the amount of
time a nurse spends with a patient multiplied by
his/her wage). Considerable information on nurses’
wage by level of experience and education is published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2017). For
generalizability, the common recommendation in economic evaluations is to use national-level average
wages rather than local or institution-specific wages
and/or compensation (Neumann, Sanders, Russell,
Siegel, & Ganiats, 2016). The major challenge in a
more accurate estimation of nursing costs is to precisely measure the time nurses spend taking care of a
patient. One common micro-costing tool to estimate
clinical time is collecting time logs. Time logs can be
collected prospectively or retrospectively through
surveys, although recall bias is a concern (Drummond
et al., 2015), and they can be burdensome for staff.
These are common in some economic evaluations
because it is often needed to separate actual intervention effort from other research and evaluation components (Haddix, Teutsch, & Corso, 2003).
Several methods have been developed to simplify
data collection by detailing patient care activities and
combining them with time estimates from expert panels or direct observation, sometimes called nursing
intensity weights (Knauf, Ballard, Mossman, & Lichtig,
2006). These weights are applied to a particular DRG;
however, they do not measure the actual nursing care
provided to a patient. A different approach using nursing terminologies from nurse assessment data in the
EHR applies a relative value unit (RVU) to estimate
time (Dykes, Wantland, Whittenburg, Lipsitz, & Saba,
2013). The advantage of the RVU model is its use of
actual data of ongoing nursing care to represent need
for nursing care.
Another micro-costing method is time-based
activity driven (TBAD) costing, which originated in
the management literature (Kaplan & Anderson,
2004). When applied to health care, its purpose is to
accurately measure the cost of treating patients for a
specific medical condition across the full care cycle
(Kaplan et al., 2014). TBAD combines two steps:
process mapping and activity-based costing. During
the process mapping stage, clinical teams identify key
events in the care cycle, which may involve clinical
and administrative components. In the second step,
activity-based costing, a dollar-per-minute capacity
cost rate for each resource is estimated for all clinical
resources involved in the care cycle. One important
component in this method is the estimation of the
time spent in each activity identified in the process
map, which in TBAD is usually done by managers or
is based on surveys of employees or even patients. As
an alternative, direct observation can be used, which
relates TBAD to time-and-motion studies, in which
clinical staff is followed and the time spent in different activities recorded (Costa et al., 2016; Finkler,
48 NURSING ECONOMIC$/January-February 2018/Vol. 36/No. 1
Knickman, Hendrickson, Lipkin, & Thompson, 1993;
Hendrich, Chow, Skierczynski, & Lu, 2008; Robinson
et al., 2007). With this methodology, substantial effort
is used in not only determining different activities,
but also in accurately recording the time in each of
them. While useful to accurately measure time spent
on activities, these methods are not practical to implement on a daily basis.
Data Structure and Time Measurement
The starting point for creating a micro-costing
measurement of nursing care is with measuring the
unique time each nurse and other nursing personnel
spends with each patient from data from the EHR. This
can be established using the nurse-to-patient assignment (e.g., a nurse caring for four patients in a 12-hour
shift provides on average 3 hours of care for each
patient) (Welton, Zone-Smith, & Bandyopadhyay,
2009). Capturing the assignment in the EHR provides a
means to allocate nursing intensity based on staffing
patterns.
Because patients often have different care needs
and as a result nurses may spend more time with any
single patient, a nursing acuity tool can be used to allocate nursing care hours to each patient from the assignment based on relative differences in demand for nursing care (Garcia, 2017). In the assignment above, a nurse
could expend 6 hours for one patient and 2 hours for
each of the other patients; therefore, a nursing acuity
tool is used to reallocate time accordingly. With this
information in place, a bottom-up or micro-costing
approach to measure nursing intensity by patient is
straightforward. The actual nursing time provided to
each patient is multiplied by either the actual or mean
wage as well as other direct-care costs such as shift differential. The contribution of other nursing personnel
such as LPN/LVN or nursing assistant can be included
in the actual costs of care in the same manner.
These are the direct costs of nursing care or the
actual time and resources expended for each patient.
Other nursing personnel costs are not directly allocable to each patient (e.g., a charge nurse who may not
take assignments or clinical nurse specialists who
work with nurses providing care). Other nursing costs
not directly allocable to an individual patient include
hours worked but the nurse is involved with in-service education or orientation. These can be viewed as
direct costs which benefit the patient but cannot be
directly assigned.
A third component of nursing costs are those that
are not actually worked, but incurred as a benefit
such as vacation or sick time, or obligation such as
jury duty or military leave. These indirect nursing
costs add to the overall cost of nursing care and must
be considered and monitored. When all costs are
identified and linked to each patient, we can more
fully understand both the actual or true costs of nursing care provided to each patient. When linked to
each patient and the additional data that can be
extracted from the patient record in the EHR such as
DRG, LOS, patient demographics, or hospital outcome, we can better understand how nursing care
resources are uniquely expended for each patient and
what patterns can be identified from the data. For
example, do older patients need more nursing care
than younger patients for the same DRG? Does a higher skill mix of registered nurses, and the higher cost of
that skill mix, produce better clinical outcomes
which reduces overall costs of health care? Which
patients consume more nursing care than others and
can we identify these nursing intensity outliers early
in the trajectory of a hospitalization and provide more
comprehensive and ultimately less costly care?
Conclusion
A new method of costing nursing care for the individual patient using data from the EHR to link nurses
directly to patients and allocate actual hours and wage
data provides a unique patient-level metric of nursing
care. This micro-costing or bottom-up approach is a
more accurate reflection of the clinical care being provided and allows greater transparency of nursing intensity and costs. Collection of patient-level nursing intensity and cost provides a foundation for further analysis
that can identify patterns of nursing care linked with
clinical as well as operational outcomes. $
REFERENCES
Azoulay, A., Doris, N.M., Filion, K.B., Caron, J., Pilote, L., &
Eisenberg, M.J. (2007). The use of the transition cost accounting system in health services research. Cost Effectiveness and
Resource Allocation, 5, 11.
Costa, S., Regier, D.A., Meissner, B., Cromwell, I., Ben-Neriah, S.,
Chavez, E., ... Connors, J.M. (2016). A time-and-motion
approach to micro-costing of high-throughput genomic assays.
Current Oncology, 23(5), 304-313.
Drummond, M.F., Sculpher, M.J., Claxton, K., Stoddart, G.L., &
Torrance, G.W. (2015). Methods for the economic evaluation of
health care programmes. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford
University Press.
Dykes, P.C., Wantland, D., Whittenburg, L., Lipsitz, S., & Saba, V.K.
(2013). A pilot study to explore the feasibility of using the
Clinical Care Classification System for developing a reliable
costing method for nursing services. AMIA Annual
Symposium Proceedings, 364-371.
Edwardson, S.R., & Giovannetti, P.B. (1987). A review of costaccounting methods for nursing services. Nursing Economic$,
5(3), 107-117.
Elliott, D. (1997). Costing intensive care services: A review of study
methods, results and limitations. Australian Critical Care,
10(2), 55-63.
Etzioni, R., Riley, G.F., Ramsey, S.D., & Brown, M. (2002).
Measuring costs: Administrative claims data, clinical trials,
and beyond. Medical Care, 40(6 Suppl.), III63-72.
Finkler, S.A., Knickman, J.R., Hendrickson, G., Lipkin, M., &
Thompson, W.G. (1993). A comparison of work-sampling and
time-and-motion techniques for studies in health services
research. Health Services Research, 28(5), 577-597.
Frick, K.D. (2009). Micro-costing quantity data collection methods.
Medical Care, 47(7 Suppl. 1), S76-S81.
Garcia, A.L. (2017). Variability in acuity in acute care. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 47(10), 476-483.
Gold, M.R. (1996). Cost-effectiveness in health and medicine.
Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
Haddix, A.C., Teutsch, S.M., & Corso, P.S. (2003). Prevention effectiveness: A guide to decision analysis and economic evaluation. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
Hendrich, A., Chow, M.P., Skierczynski, B.A., & Lu, Z. (2008). A 36-
hospital time and motion study: How do medical-surgical nurses spend their time? The Permanente Journal, 12(3), 25-34.
Holbrook, R.F., Hargrave, K., & Traverso, L.W. (1996). A prospective
cost analysis of pancreatoduodenectomy. American Journal of
Surgery, 171(5), 508-511.
continued on page 51
NURSING ECONOMIC$/January-February 2018/Vol. 36/No. 1 51
Data, Science, and Nursing Value
continued from page 48
Institute of Medicine. (1983). Nursing and nursing education:
Public policies and private actions. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
Kaplan, R.S., & Anderson, S.R. (2004). Time-driven activity-based
costing. Harvard Business Review, 82(11), 131-138, 150.
Kaplan, R.S., Witkowski, M., Abbott, M., Guzman, A.B., Higgins,
L.D., Meara, J.G., ... Feeley, T.W. (2014). Using time-driven
activity-based costing to identify value improvement opportunities in healthcare. Journal of Healthcare Management, 59(6),
399-412.
Knauf, R.A., Ballard, K., Mossman, P.N., & Lichtig, L.K. (2006).
Nursing cost by DRG: Nursing intensity weights. Policy,
Politics, & Nursing Practice, 7(4), 281-289.
Neumann, P.J., Sanders, G.D., Russell, L.B., Siegel, J.E., & Ganiats,
T.G. (Eds.). (2016). Cost-effectiveness in health and medicine
(2nd ed.). Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
Park, J.H., & Song, M.S. (1990). [Determination of nursing costs for
the hospitalized patients based on the patient classification
system]. Kanho Hakhoe Chi [Journal of Nurses Academic
Society], 20(1), 16-37.
Pratt, R., Burr, G., Leelarthaepin, B., Blizard, P., & Walsh, S. (1993).
The effects of all-RN and RN-EN staffing on the quality and
cost of patient care. Australian Journal of Advanced Nursing,
10(3), 27-39.
Robinson, S., Roberts, T., Barton, P., Bryan, S., Macleod, J., McCarthy,
A., ... Chlamydia Screening Studies ClaSS Project Group.
(2007). Healthcare and patient costs of a proactive chlamydia
screening programme: The Chlamydia Screening Studies project. Sexually Transmitted Infections, 83(4), 276-281.
Sermeus, W., Delesie, L., Van den Heede, K., Diya, L., & Lesaffre, E.
(2008). Measuring the intensity of nursing care: Making use of
the Belgian Nursing Minimum Data Set. International Journal
of Nursing Studies, 45(7), 1011-1021.
Sovie, M.D. (1988). Variable costs of nursing care in hospitals.
Annual Review of Nursing Research, 6, 131-150.
Thompson, J.D. (1984). The measurement of nursing intensity.
Health Care Financing Review (Suppl.), 47-55.
Traverso, L.W., & Hargrave, K. (1995). A prospective cost analysis
of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. American Journal of
Surgery, 169(5), 503-506.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2017).
Overview of BLS wage data by area of occupation. Retrieved
from https://www.bls.gov/bls/blswage.htm
Unruh, L.Y., Hassmiller, S.B., & Reinhard, S.C. (2008). The importance and challenge of paying for quality nursing care. Policy,
Politics, & Nursing Practice, 9(2), 68-72.
Welton, J.M., Zone-Smith, L., & Bandyopadhyay, D. (2009).
Estimating nursing intensity and direct cost using the nursepatient assignment. Journal of Nursing Administration, 39(6),
276-284.
Copyright of Nursing Economic$ is the property of Jannetti Publications, Inc. and its content
may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright
holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.