HCPRO.COM
6 |Briefings on Accreditation and Quality April 2017
© 2017 HCPro, an H3.Group division of Simplify Compliance LLC.
For permission to reproduce part or all of this newsletter for external distribution or use in educational packets, contact the Copyright Clearance Center at copyright.com or 978-750-8400.
Editor’s note: The following was written by Dan Egli,
PhD, executive search consultant, quality services,
performance improvement, and risk management, The
Roman Healthcare Group, LLC. He can be reached at
dane@romanhealth.com.
“Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to
go from here?”
For many organizations, accreditation demonstrates a
commitment to improve quality, manage risk, and
distinguish itself from its competitors. The challenge is
choosing an accreditation organization (AO) that fits
in with your organizational culture and philosophy.
Today more than ever, selecting an AO is a strategic
decision which requires research to find the right
organizational fit.
Sometimes, what was great then, doesn’t always fit
now. This is because organizations change as do
accreditors. It may not be possible to know why you
are accredited by a certain AO, or it may be because
that has always been the case. Having a look into other
options can be daunting. This brief provides insights to
thought provoking questions that aim to facilitate the
decision-making process.
“I think I could, if I only know how to begin.”
Start by considering what is important to your organization, reflect on your philosophy and values, and then
make a list of what is important in an accreditation
partner. Describe that list with qualitative statements.
For example, quality can mean a variety of things; for
some, it is the ability to submit measures and have
access to quarterly benchmark reports for each indicator. It could also mean the look and feel of the AO
from an aesthetic view such as the design of the manual, or style of correspondence. Just as quality is
broad, so is the style of the AO’s survey. Are you
looking for the army sergeant, school master, mentor,
friend, or partner?
The five Cs
1. Culture: Does the AO’s mission and vision
resonate with your organization? Consider the
AO’s culture and philosophy from the desk to
the survey. An AO with a supportive educational
focus may have a collegial peer to peer review
philosophy; this AO may also provide direct live
support for standards interpretation; an AO with
an excellence focus may be driven by metrics; or,
you may just want an AO who will accredit you
and leave you alone for three years.
2. Communication: Communication is an important
aspect of partnership. What is important to your
organization when it comes to style of communication? Culture is reflected through communication, along with excellence and quality of
workmanship. Communication can make you
feel empowered, fearful, supported, or disempowered. Check in with yourself every time you have
a conversation with the AO: Were you able to
connect with someone, were all your questions
answered, did you receive the information you
required? Did you feel empowered or confused?
3. Cycle: Find out about the number of surveys and
the survey-related processes involved with a
three-year cycle, because this impacts cost. What
is the reporting procedure and what happens if
you have conditions out during the survey?
4. Cost: How much does a three-year cycle cost in
total? When considering cost, bear in mind
operating costs, which include: staff time across
all aspects of the survey process, such as quality
specialists, life safety specialists, and data
specialists. Additional costs, which are not
always seen until the agreement has been
signed, include quality-related IT applications
and data vendors/portals that may be required.
Are the standards straightforward, or do you
need videos, webinars, and other resources to
interpret them? How often do the standards
change? What support is available; do you need
Healthcare accreditation: Through the looking
glass in 2017
HCPRO.COM
April 2017 Briefings on Accreditation and Quality| 7
© 2017 HCPro, an H3.Group division of Simplify Compliance LLC.
For permission to reproduce part or all of this newsletter for external distribution or use in educational packets, contact the Copyright Clearance Center at copyright.com or 978-750-8400.
consultants? The accreditation cycle costs add
up, depending on the number of visits, the type
of resources required, the pricing model, on-site
survey chargebacks, and administration fees.
5. Consultation: Find out if the AO will conduct
a business presentation. If you are a smaller
organization, a webinar is the most practical and
cost effective way of meeting your potential AO.
If you are a health system with several hospitals,
it is reasonable to request a face-to-face business
presentation/meeting with key decision-makers.
To acknowledge the questions and make any sort of
informed decision, some additional information is
essential. The primary AOs for hospital accreditation
include: The Center for Improvement in Healthcare
Quality (CIHQ), Det Norske Veritas (DNV), Healthcare Facilities Accreditation Program (HFAP)—which is
now a part of the Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Health Care (AAAHC)—and The Joint Commission. The challenge is there is no one repository for the
information you need. Each organization is focused on
ensuring the advancement of safe, reliable, quality care.
While each AO must survey to the CMS hospital
Conditions of Participation, they each have their own
style, methodology, and process. These nuances are
related to structure, cost, frequency of survey, survey
process, standards, and resources available to accredited hospitals. The figure on p. 8 provides an overview of
the four AOs with information from their key leaders.
Reflecting on the journey
Once you have done your due diligence and are in the
process of determining whether to make a change, it is
important to recognize that it can take anywhere up to
18 months to transition to another AO or even begin
the initial process for accreditation. Actions to
consider as you make this determination:
1. Get references from the AO and get input from
others who have made transitions between one
AO and another (and perhaps back again).
2. Identify what part of the current AO cycle you
are in, which includes date of next annual fee
invoice; date of accreditation re-application
request and submission deadline.
3. Conduct a gap analysis; review your compliance
against each of the AO standards.
4. Involve key stakeholders and leaders within
your organization to determine the capacity for
and value of this transition.
These actions above will provide useful information
for healthcare leaders to use to confirm the value of
their current AO or potentially develop a time frame
for transition to a new AO. H
REFERENCES:
Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Healthcare. (n.d.).
Retrieved February 1, 2017, from www.aaahc.org.
Healthcare Facilities Accreditation Program (HFAP). (n.d.). Retrieved
February 1, 2017, from www.hfap.org.
Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Healthcare: Meg Gravesmill,
MBA, Vice President Accreditation Services (personal communication).
Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Healthcare: Therese (Tess)
Poland, RN, BSN, MSN, Vice President Ambulatory Operations (personal communication).
Center for Improvement in Healthcare Quality (n.d.). Retrieved February
1, 2017, from https://cihq.org.
Center for Improvement in Healthcare Quality: Richard Curtis, RN, MS,
HACP, CEO (personal communication).
Center for Improvement in Healthcare Quality: Traci Burgkwist, BA, RCP,
HACP, Executive Director of Survey Operations (personal communication).
Det Norske Veritas Healthcare (DNV-GL). (n.d.). Retrieved February 1,
2017, from www.dnvglhealthcare.com.
Meldi, D., Rhoades, F., & Gippe, A. (2009, January/February). The big
three: A side by side matrix comparing hospital accrediting agencies.
NAMSS Synergy. www.namss.org/Portals/0/Regulatory/The%20
Big%20Three%20A%20Side%20by%20Side%20Matrix%20Comparing%20Hospital%20Accrediting%20Agencies.pdf
The Joint Commission (n.d.). Retrieved February 1, 2017, from
www.jointcommission.org/.
The Joint Commission: Mark Chassin, MD, FACP, MPP, MPH, President
and CEO (personal communication).
The Joint Commission: Ann Scott Blouin, RN, PhD, FACHE, Executive
Vice President of Customer Relations (personal communication).
Vallejo, B. C., Flies, L. A., & Fine, D. J. (2011). A comparison of hospital
accreditation programs. Journal of Clinical Engineering, 36(1), 32–38.
Doi:10.1097/jce.0b013e3182042386
http://journals.lww.com/jcejournal/Abstract/2011/01000/A_Comparison_of_Hospital_Accreditation_Programs.24.aspx.
HCPRO.COM
8 |Briefings on Accreditation and Quality April 2017
© 2017 HCPro, an H3.Group division of Simplify Compliance LLC.
For permission to reproduce part or all of this newsletter for external distribution or use in educational packets, contact the Copyright Clearance Center at copyright.com or 978-750-8400.
Comparison of Accreditation Organizations
Comparison
Element
Center for Improvement in
Healthcare Quality (CIHQ)
Det Norske Veritas Healthcare,
Inc. (DNV)
Healthcare Facilities
Accreditation Program (HFAP)
The Joint Commission (TJC)
Organizational
Focus
CIHQ is a nationally recognized accrediting organization approved by CMS to
deem acute acute hospitals to be in
compliance with the Medicare Conditions of Participation. CIHQ’ focus is to
partner with accredited hospitals in
improving the quality and safety of
patient care by providing a survey process that is educational, collegial, and
value-added.
DNV’s corporate purpose is safeguarding life, property, and the environment.
DNV received deeming authroity for
hospitals from CMS on September
26, 2008.
The HFAP is a nationally recognized
accreditation organization with deeming
authority from CMS. Its mission is to
advance high quality patient care and
safety through objective application of
recognized standards.
TJC has collaborated with healthcare
organizations for more than half a century to focus on safe, quality care for
the American public through a voluntary
independent evaluation process. Healthcare is the sole industry served.
Organizational
Structure
CIHQ is a privately-held limited liability
company with its corporate headquarters located in McKinney, TX. CIHQ has
been in existence since 1999 and provides accreditation and consulting services to over 300 hospitals across the
United States.
DNV Healthcare, Inc. is an operating
company of Det Norske Vertas. DNVHC
corporate offices are in Houston,
Texas and Cincinnati, Ohio. DNV has
been operating in the United States
since 1898.
HFAP is a not-for-profit organization
dedicated to helping healthcare organizations maintain the highest standards
in patient care and comply with everchanging government regulations
and a constantly evolving healthcare
environment.
TJC is a not-for-profit organization dedicated to providing the highest value
service to healthcare organizations
Number of
Accredited
Hospitals
Since receiving deeming authority from
CMS in July of 2013, CIHQ has accredited more than 20 hospitals, and is
scheduled to have more than 30 hospitals by the end of 2015.
Since receiving deeming authority from
CMS in September 2008, DNV has
accredited more than 27 hospitals and
will be listed soon on the DNV Web site
Nearly 200 hospitals and more than
200 other healthcare facilities as well
as laboratories are listed on the HPAP
Web site.
Nearly 5,000 hospitals and approximately 10,000 other healthcare organizations are accredited or certified
by TJC.
History Formed in 1999 as a consulting company, CIHQ became the nations 4th
deeming authority for acute care hospitals in 2013. Today, in addition to being
a deeming authority, CIHQ continues
provides a wide-range of accreditation
and support services to hospitals
through its consulting arm - Accreditation Resource Services.
DNV has a worldwide reputation for
quality and integrity in certification,
standards development, and risk management in a wide range of industries,
including extensive international healthcare experience.
The HFAP has been accrediting
healthcare facilities for more than 60
years and under Medicare/Medicaid
since its inception. HFAP is also authorized to survey clinical laboratories
under CLIA.
The Joint Commision was established
by healthcare professionals to improve
the delivery of patient care and has
been conducting accreditation of
healthcare organizations for more than
50 years. Unique deeming authority
was awarded in 1966.
Governance &
Leadership
CIHQ senior staff have over 75 years of
combined clinical and executive-level
hospital leadership experience.
DNV is managed by a dedicated group
of degreed professionals, each with
many years of experience in their
respective field of healthcare management, clinical services, health law, ISO
certification and engineering. The
accreditation management team has
extensive healthcare operational experience in the United States and understands the dynamics of a complex
healthcare organization.
The AOA Bureau of Healthcare Facilities
Accreditation is a panel of physicians
and administrators from family practice,
surgery, internal medicine, pathology,
obstetrics and gynecology, hospital
administration, colleges of osteopathic
medicine and the American Academy of
Osteopathy. HFAP is represented in all
major healthcare and quality improvement forums as a key player in the
shaping of healthcare policy.
TJC’s Board of Commissioners is
comprised of physicians, nurses,
healthcare leaders and professionals,
and public representatives. TJC leadership helps influence national healthcare
policy, funding priorites, performance
measurement, and future legislation
alongside other key stakeholders and
influencers.
Accreditation
Requirements
CIHQ standards are closely aligned with
the Medicare Conditions of Participation
at 42CFR. Requirements are based on
the interpretive guidance provided to
CMS State enforcement agencies in the
State Operations Manual (SOM).
Because the Conditions of Participation
address minimum standards of care,
CIHQ has developed additional standards that address key quality and
patient safety challenges faced in
today’s healthcare environment. CIHQ’
standards are clear, understandable,
and designed to allow hospitals maximum flexibility in developing compliance
strategies.
DNV standards are directly related to
the CMS Conditions of Participation
(CoPs) and apply to any size hospital.
Standards are less prescriptive and the
survey process supports CMS quality
initiatives, focus on continual improvement prioritized by the organization,
and allows organizational innovation to
determine the most effective means for
compliance using best practices.
HFAP standards include CMS and other
nationally recognized standards, as well
as evidence-based best practice and
selected patient safety initiatives. Standards are realistic, understandable,
measurable, beneficial, and achievable.
The standards exceed the Conditions of
Participation (CoPs).
Leading healthcare practice standards
and National Patient Safety Goals are
developed in concert with healthcare
professionals, the public, and other key
stakeholders. The standards exceed the
Conditions of Participation (CoPs) and
are directly relevant to the current delivery of healthcare.
HCPRO.COM
April 2017 Briefings on Accreditation and Quality| 9
© 2017 HCPro, an H3.Group division of Simplify Compliance LLC.
For permission to reproduce part or all of this newsletter for external distribution or use in educational packets, contact the Copyright Clearance Center at copyright.com or 978-750-8400.
Comparison of Accreditation Organizations (cont.)
Comparison
Element
Center for Improvement in
Healthcare Quality (CIHQ)
Det Norske Veritas Healthcare,
Inc. (DNV)
Healthcare Facilities
Accreditation Program (HFAP)
The Joint Commission (TJC)
Survey
Process
The survey process is a highly collaborative and educational in approach utilizing
tracer methodology and CMS survey
procedures. CIHQ requires hospitals to
only undergo a survey for services and
sites of care billed under the hospital’s
Medicare CCN. CIHQ does not require
entities to be surveyed just because of a
relationship with the hospital.
The NIAHOSM and ISO surveys are done
together through Tracer Methodology, as
well as staff and patient interviews. Tracer Methodology has been a staple of ISO
9001 surveys since ISO’s inception in
1987. All areas of the hospital are surveyed, both clinical and non-clinical.
Tracer Methodology is a tool to identify
and document effective processes.
Comprehensive, non-biased and thorough reviews of patient-centered processes within the facility are conducted
in the least disruptive way possible.
Educationally focused reviews also
offer non-prescriptive recommendations
for corrective measures for deficiencies
found.
With guidance from the healthcare field,
TJC developed the tracer methodology
to follow and evaluate the quality of a
patient’s healthcare experience. This
offers a patient-centered and process
focused survey rather than a paperintensive process.
Survey
Frequency
“(All surveys are unannounced)
Initial Survey - Full survey conducted
within 4 months of initial application
Mid-Cycle Survey - One or two day surveyapproximately 18 months into survey
cycle Triennial Survey - Full survey
every 36 months. Occurs between
34 – 36 month of cycle”
DNV performs an annual on-site survey. HFAP performs on-site surveys of hospitals once every three (3) years.
TJC performs on-site surveys of hospitals every three (3) years. As part of the
TJC Intracycle Monitoring requirements,
he accredited organization is required to
complete a Focused Standards Assessment (FSA).
Surveyors All CIHQ surveyors are clinicians
with extensive hospital experience
and survey full time. All surveyors
undergo a rigorous training program
and proctoring. In addition, CIHQ is the
only accrediting organization that
requires their surveyors to be nationally
certified as healthcare accreditation
professionals (HACP). Surveyors must
complete continuing education on an
ongoing basis.
All DNV surveyors must successfully
complete NIAHO Surveyor didactic
training and separate ISO 9001 Lead
Auditor didactic training.
Surveyors include physicians, registered
nurses, and the PE Specialists come
with a facilities and safety background.
All surveyors must complete 45 hours of
continuing education in their discipline
within every three (3) year period.
Surveyors must participate in annual
surveyor training, as well as other
courses offered throughout the year by
DNV and DNVHC staff.
All DNV surveyors must successfully
complete NIAHO Surveyor didactic
training and separate ISO 9001 Lead
Auditor didactic training.
Surveyors include physicians, registered
nurses, and the PE Specialists come
with a facilities and safety background.
All surveyors must complete 45 hours
of continuing education in their discipline within every three (3) year period.
Surveyors must participate in annual
surveyor training, as well as other
courses offered throughout the year by
DNV and DNVHC staff.
All DNV surveyors must successfully
complete NIAHO Surveyor didactic
training and separate ISO 9001 Lead
Auditor didactic training.
Surveyors include physicians, registered
nurses, and the PE Specialists come
with a facilities and safety background.
All surveyors must complete 45 hours
of continuing education in their discipline within every three (3) year period.
Surveyors must participate in annual
surveyor training, as well as other
courses offered throughout the year by
DNV and DNVHC staff.
HFAP surveyors are not employees of
the organization, but are paid volunteers. Frequently recruited from HFAPaccredited facilities, survey teams
include physicians, nurses, and administrators with years of experience.
They represent leadership in their own
facilities and bring a current understanding of the healthcare industry to
the survey process.
All surveyors are employees of TJC and
have extensive healthcare experience;
many are currently employed in hospitals or private practice. Surveyors must
pass a certification exam. Training is
continuous and collaborative. TJC is the
first and only accrediting body to certify
its surveryors. TJC is the first and only
accrediting body to certify its surveyors.
Surveyors have a strong educational
background and receive continuing education to keep them up to date on
advances in quality-related performance
evaluation.
All surveyors are employees of TJC and
have extensive healthcare experience;
many are currently employed in hospitals or private practice. Surveyors must
pass a certification exam. Training is
continuous and collaborative. TJC is the
first and only accrediting body to certify
its surveyors. TJC is the first and only
accrediting body to certify its surveyors.
Surveyors have a strong educational
background and receive continuing education to keep them up to date on
advances in quality-related performance
evaluation.
HCPRO.COM
10 |Briefings on Accreditation and Quality April 2017
© 2017 HCPro, an H3.Group division of Simplify Compliance LLC.
For permission to reproduce part or all of this newsletter for external distribution or use in educational packets, contact the Copyright Clearance Center at copyright.com or 978-750-8400.
Comparison of Accreditation Organizations (cont.)
Comparison
Element
Center for Improvement in
Healthcare Quality (CIHQ)
Det Norske Veritas Healthcare,
Inc. (DNV)
Healthcare Facilities
Accreditation Program (HFAP)
The Joint Commission (TJC)
Scoring
Process
All standards and attendant requirements are scored as “pass / fail”. There
are no percentages or categories. The
closer a standard is to assuring the provision of safe quality care, the higher
the expectation of compliance will be.
The goal is to strike a proper balance
between focusing on meaningful issues
versus technical and isolated lapses in
compliance.
DNV does not aggregate the scoring of
the survey. The organization is responsible for developing and implementing
corrective action plans to address all
noncomformities identified.
“Surveyors report discrepancies to the
HFAP Office. The facility is then sent a
comprehensive report. The facility then
submits a Plan of Correction within
30-60 days.”
Accreditation
Categories
(Accredited - Fully meets all CIHQ
accreditation policies and requirements)
(Accreditation at Risk - Violation of key
CIHQ policies / survey requirements)
(Accreditation Withdrawn / Denied -
There are two reasons why accreditation would be denied 1. Failure to ultimately address an “accreditation at
risk” issue 2. Refusal to permit CIHQ to
conduct a survey and/or access to necessary information
DNV has the following categories of
accreditation:
• Accredited (Noncomformities resolved
pursuant to DNV accepted corrective
action plan)
• Jeopardy Status (Organization
fails to meet corrective action plan
requirements)
• Not Accredited
The HFAP has three categories of
accreditation. They are: Full Accreditation; Interim Accreditation; and Denial.
“TJC has the following categories of
accreditation:
• Accredited (Hospital is in compliance
with all applicable standards at the time
of survey or has successfully addressed
all requirements for improvement.)
• Provisional (Hospital fails to successfully address all requirements for
improvement within a specified
timeframe.)
• Conditional (Nature of the Requirements for Improvement requires an
onsite follow-up survey) • Preliminary
Denial (Severity of findings justifies
denial of accreditation. Decision is subject to review and appeal.)
• Denial (Accreditation has been
removed or denied and appeals have
been exhausted.)”
Cost of
Accreditation
CIHQ Charges a flat annual fee, based
on licensed bed capacity. This fee
includes full and mid-cycle surveys as
well as travel expenses. In addition,
there is NO additional fee for follow-up
and complaint surveys (two per year).
Hospitals pay only travel expenses.
CIHQ has a low price guarantee and will
meet or beat the overall cost of other
accrediting organizations
DNV does not charge for the NIAHOSM
Standards, Interpretive Guidelines or
Accredidation Process for non-commercial use The cost of the survey is based
on the number of surveyors and the
length of the survey. Size of the facility,
average daily census, number of FTEs,
complexity of services offered, type of
survey to be conducted and whether
special care units or off-site clinics or
locations will factor into the cost of the
survey. A “Quick Quote” can be submitted to the DNB via the Web site. The
average annual cost for DNV services is
$23,100. These fees include all travel
expenses.
“The average cost for HFAP services
averages $25,000 for three years. Individual facility costs vary by size and
complexity.”
The average cost for TJC services is
$33,000 for three (3) years; a survey is
required once every three years. However, individual hospital costs vary by
size and complexity.
Accreditation
Decision
Process
Authority for granting, modifying, or
removing a hospital’s accreditation status rests with the Chief Executive Officer of CIHQ. If a hospital wishes to
appeal an accreditation decision, CIHQ
will convene a independent Accreditation Review Board (ARB). The decision
of the ARB is final.
NIAHOSM Accreditation. If appropriate,
the organization may receive a three (3)
year certification for meeting the ISO
9001 Quality Management System
requirements. If a hospital is dissatisfied with an accreditation decision, it
may appeal to the “Standards and
Appeals Board” (SAB). The SAB is
an independent body chartered by the
DNV Board of Directors to hear accreditation appeals. The decision of the SAB
is final.
BLANK Adverse accreditation decisions are primarily based on non-compliance with
requirements that have a direct impact
on patient safety and quality of care.
HCPRO.COM
April 2017 Briefings on Accreditation and Quality| 11
© 2017 HCPro, an H3.Group division of Simplify Compliance LLC.
For permission to reproduce part or all of this newsletter for external distribution or use in educational packets, contact the Copyright Clearance Center at copyright.com or 978-750-8400.
Comparison of Accreditation Organizations (cont.)
Comparison
Element
Center for Improvement in
Healthcare Quality (CIHQ)
Det Norske Veritas Healthcare,
Inc. (DNV)
Healthcare Facilities
Accreditation Program (HFAP)
The Joint Commission (TJC)
Accreditation
Support
CIHQ is the only accrediting organization to offer a comprehensive array of
support services to its hospitals at no
additional cost. Services are provided
through CIHQ’ consulting division -
Accreditation Resource Services (ARS).
Services include; organization-wide
access to standards and interpretation,
a comprehensive resource library of
over 400 template documents and
tools, monthly webinars on accreditation topics, an electronic reference
library, staff training modules, continuing education credits, survey preparation took kits, and complimentary
registration for two at CIHQ’ annual
accreditation and quality summit.
Guidelines for Accreditation Process at
no charge for non-commercial use.
The HFAP provides standards interpretation for its clients. In addition, HFAP
accreditation manuals reflect the latest
standards and include a comprehensive
cross-reference system to CMS standards, as well as scoring guidelines that
assist facilities to prepare for surveys
Accreditation support includes, but is
not limited to, dedicated account representatives, standards interpretation
assistance, periodic performance
reviews with flexible options, patient
safety information and advisories, strategic surveillance system (S3), and
electronic manuals.
Public
Health Care
Advocacy
CIHQ works closely with CMS and other
key stakeholders in shaping the accreditation and regulatory environment for
hospitals in the United States.
BLANK While HFAP participates in a variety of
federal, state, and local support initiatives to advance patient quality and
safety, its primary focus is delivering a
high quality, educationally focused survey experience.
TJC has been the American healthcare
quality advocate for more than half a
century with ongoing initiatives such as
“Speak Up,” National Patient Safety
Goals, Office of Quality Monitoring,
Quality Check, Public Advisory Group,
Business Advisory Group, Board representation, and public policy initiatives to
help consumers and providers of
healthcare.
Patient Safety CIHQ has embedded strong principles
of patient safety into its standards, and
use evidence-based best practices in
helping hospitals identify potential risks
to patient safety and subsequently
develop risk mitigation strategies.
“DNV supports the initiatives that hospitals have developed and implemented to
guide safe patient care practices. DNV
also supports and fosters innovations
through development of hospital best
practices but clearly understand that
some practices do not suit all organizations. DNV believes that there are different avenues for achieving positive
patient safety outcomes and the hospitals know their patient populations and
resources best.”
HFAP incorporates safety standards
from a variety of sources to reflect the
broad national spectrum. Using the
Medicare CoPs as a base and adapting
such things as the NQF 30 safe practices and endorsing the Institute for
Healthcare Improvement’s “5 Million
Lives Campaign” HFAP accreditation
standards include current patient safety
initiatives throughout.
TJC has a proven record of helping
thousands of organizations address
their patient safety problems, including
the review of sentinel events. Collective
learning from their experience has been
shared with the broader healthcare
community of organizations, such as
through the publication of Sentinel
Event Alerts.
Goals of
Organization
CIHQ’ goal and mission is to create a
regulatory environment that enables
healthcare organizations to effectively
deliver safe, quality patient care.
DNV has two major goals: to access
compliance and educate hospitals in
best practices. Hospitals can use innovation to develop new methods for producing positive results. DNV holds hospitals
accountable to ensure that processes
are planned, managed, measured, documented, and continually improved.
The HFAP goal is to continue to help
healthcare facilities deliver high quality
patient care through the application of
its consistent standards while continuing to streamline and improve its survey
processes.
The goal is to help hospitals become
“high reliability” organizations for delivering safe, effective care. TJC helps
hospitals help patients to achieve
continual progress toward quality
healthcare.
Continuous
Improvement
CIHQ believes that hospitals are in the
best position to determine for themselves an approach to continuous
improvement. CIHQ does not prescribe
a specific performance improvement
methodology as a condition of accreditation, or dictate to the leadership of
a hospital or medical staff how it will
govern itself.
DNV utilizes integrated standards
from the internationally recognized
ISO 9001 quality management system
requirements.
For more than 60 years, the HFAP
has provided healthcare facilities with
a reliable system of measurement for
improving their processes enabling
them to provide their communities
with high quality patient care. They
continue to evaluate their program to
support the ever evolving healthcare
environment.
The heart of TJC’s “Gold Seal of
Approval”™ centers on continuous
improvement with employee involvement, enablement, and empowerment.
For 50 years, TJC has been working
together with healthcare providers on
innovative solutions and new processes,
such as the Standards Improvement Initiative and the Health Care-Associated
Infection Compendium.
Source: Dan Egli, PhD
Copyright of Briefings on the Joint Commission is the property of HCPro and its content may
not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.
Copyright of Briefings on Accreditation & Quality is the property of HCPro and its content
may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright
holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.