150 NURSING ECONOMIC$/May-June 2017/Vol. 35/No. 3
I
T SEEMS WE NEVER have
enough time yet time waits
for no one. This play on
words introduces a set of
data tied to, well, time. Consider
the many things nurses do: take a
set of vital signs at 8:00 a.m., give
a medication at 9:00 a.m., or get a
patient ready for a procedure at
noon. We count things that happen between two time points
such as the assignment of nurses
to a number of patients in a 12-hour shift. Time and
date stamps form an essential part of our data architecture in the electronic health record (EHR).
Data that are clinically relevant have a unique
patient identifier. This links EHR data to someone
under the care of nurses and other healthcare
providers. Nursing-collected data also have a unique
nurse identifier attached (e.g., the nurse who recorded
a set of vital signs or administered a medication).
Linking nurses to patients allows for evaluation of
care provided by individual and groups of nurses
over time. This set of data forms the basis for many if
not most clinically and operationally relevant analysis to identify events, compare two or more data
points, monitor the sequence of events, count the
number of events between time points, or identify the
variability and trajectory of events over time (see
Table 1).
Comparing Data Over Time
A time-referenced state variable shows the value
of a clinically meaningful event such as a blood pressure or serum blood sugar for a patient at a particular
time and date against some expected or normal value.
A comparison can be made between events (e.g., a
heart rate of 120 at 0900 is higher than a heart rate of
86 at 0600). Time-referenced sequence data compares
data points over time. For example, an intravenous
antibiotic scheduled every 12 hours can vary by actual administration by 1-2 hours or more and potentially affect effectiveness or toxicity of a drug.
The number of events within two time points can
be calculated (e.g., how often nurses manage patient
pain through serial assessments). If the unit practice
requires assessments every 4 hours and reassessment
after a PRN analgesic is given, the number and variance of these assessments can be calculated. With
patient and nurse unique identifiers, several new
analyses are possible. Patient-level data can be used
to analyze how often pain was assessed by each nurse
and associated with patient satisfaction scores. The
types of nurses can be evaluated (e.g., how well do
inexperienced or float nurses perform compared to
other nurses?). This raises the question of “big brother” watching (Welton, 2016). However, using timereferenced data linked to nurses and patients can provide a useful and powerful tool to identify patterns
and trends that are clinically and operationally relevant and may provide actionable information that can
optimize nursing care delivery systems.
One other interesting aspect of using time-referenced data is the link between events and a patient’s
clinical course (see Table 2). One example is the relationship between monitoring a patient’s blood glucose level and insulin administration. If blood sampling is delayed, there could be a higher incidence of
hyperglycemia. Several key clinical or operational
indicators could be combined to take a snapshot of a
unit. Examples include the number of patients with
elevated body temperature, overall delays in medication administration, how often patients are ambulated
after surgery, etc., as potential indicators of high nursing workload and missed nursing care (Kalisch & Xie,
2014).
Time-Referenced Data
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 A time-referenced state variable shows the value of a
clinically meaningful event for a patient at a particular
time and date against some expected or normal
value.
 Time-referenced data can provide new insights into
patterns, trends, and clusters of events directly from
the data collected and used by nurses in providing
health care.
 The direct link between nurses and patients using
unique identifiers for both can provide clinically and
operationally meaningful information and details over
different time horizons.
JOHN M. WELTON, PhD, RN, FAAN, is Professor and Senior
Scientist, Health Systems Research, University of Colorado College
of Nursing, Aurora, CO; and Nursing Economic$ Editorial Board
Member.
CATHY KLEINER, PhD, RN, is Research Scientist, Nursing
Outcomes, Research, and Evidence-Based Practice, Denver Health
Hospital Authority, Denver, CO.
BONNIE ADRIAN, PhD, RN, is Research Nurse Scientist,
UCHealth, Aurora, CO.
John M. Welton
Cathy Kleiner
Bonnie Adrian
John M. Welton
Data, Science, & Nursing Value
NURSING ECONOMIC$/May-June 2017/Vol. 35/No. 3 151
Practice Applications
How can these data be used in practice? The link
established between nurses collecting data and an
individual patient provides a basis for examining a
nursing encounter or the interaction between one or
more nurses and patients over time. Aggregate data
sampled over different time frames can provide a way
to identify changes in unit or hospital performance.
Altogether, time-referenced data can provide new
insights into patterns, trends, and clusters of events
directly from the data collected and used by nurses in
providing health care. The direct link between nurses
and patients using unique identifiers for both can provide clinically and operationally meaningful information and details over different time horizons than has
been possible to date. $
REFERENCES
Kalisch, B.J., & Xie, B. (2014). Errors of omission: Missed nursing
care. Western Journal of Nursing Research, 36(7), 875-890.
Kane, R.L., Shamliyan, T.A., Mueller, C., Duval, S., & Wilt, T.J.
(2007). The association of registered nurse staffing levels and
patient outcomes: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
Medical Care, 45(12), 1195-1204.
Welton, J.M. (2016). Nurses and the ethics of big data. Nursing
Economic$, 34(5), 257.
Table 1.
Time-Referenced Healthcare Data
Time-Relevant Data Definition Examples
State Actual time of a clinically or operationally
relevant event
• Oral temperature
• Spot blood glucose level
Comparison Comparison in time difference between one
event and another
• Systolic blood pressure decreases from 110
to 70 mmHg over 2-hour period
Sequence Measurement of time difference between one
time-based event to the next in a sequence of
events
• Antibiotic dose to dose time intervals
Event clusters Number of events between two time points • Number of pain assessments between 0600-
1200, practice norm, at least one pain
assessment every 4 hours
Variability Degree of variance in some measure between
time units can be compared with degree of
variance that is expected to identify higher-than
or lower-than-expected time variability.
• Variance in nurse staffing levels shift by shift
unrelated to patient care needs (may reflect
organizational instability)
• Variance in vital signs, blood glucose levels,
etc. (may reflect clinical instability)
Table 2.
Clinical Performance Exemplars
Clinical Exemplar Description Potential Clinical Outcome
Medication
administration
Performance of administering medications on
time
Delays or omissions, toxicity or ineffective
dosing
Pain management Use of time stamps to evaluate how often pain
was assessed, pharmacologic use (e.g.,
variation in use of opioids by nurses, units, etc.)
Poor pain control, overuse of opioid analgesics,
and inconsistent administration of opioid and
non-opioid analgesics
Glycemic control Frequency of fingerstick blood sugar testing
(surveillance)
Hyper or hypoglycemia
Anticoagulants On-time administration and incidence of late or
omitted doses
Occurrence of deep vein thrombi or pulmonary
embolism
Nurse-patient
assignment
Workload, shift level variation, and association
with outcomes such as falls, infections, etc.
Infections, falls, pressure ulcers, etc.
(Kane, Shamliyan, Mueller, Duval, & Wilt, 2007)
Copyright of Nursing Economic$ is the property of Jannetti Publications, Inc. and its content
may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright
holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.