For additional ancillary materials related to this chapter, please visit the point.
Abstract
Learning Objectives
The Evolution of Healthcare Quality
Quality Pioneers
Healthcare Quality in the 21st Century
The First Era: Nightingale, Codman, and the American College of Surgeons
The Second Era: Donabedian and The Joint Commission’s Monitoring and Evaluation Process
The Third Era: Berwick, Batalden, and James “Discover” Deming, Juran, and “Japan, Inc.”
The Fourth Era: Patient Is Front and Center of Quality and Safety with Growth of Advocacy, Engagement, and Activation
Leadership and Performance Improvement
Fundamental Principles of Leadership
Leadership Framework
The Governing Body
Organizational Strategy and Performance Management
Structure for Performance and Process Improvement
Setting Priorities
Action Plan and Project Development
Planning and Evaluation of Improvement Projects and Activities
Evaluation and Selection of EBP Guidelines
Clinical Guidelines and Pathways
Performance and Process Improvement Approaches
Retrospective Audits
Quality Assurance
Reengineering and System Redesign
Rapid-Cycle Improvement
Six Sigma
Lean Enterprise
Performance Monitoring and Evaluation
Medication Use
Blood and Blood Product Use
Restraints
Operative and Invasive Procedures
p. 133
p. 134
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Morbidity and Mortality
Infection Prevention, Surveillance, and Control
Medical Records/Electronic Health Records
Medical Peer Review
Performance Improvement Tools
Affinity Diagram
Brainstorming
Cause-and-Effect, Ishikawa, or Fishbone Diagram
Checklist
Deployment Chart or Planning Grid
Delphi Method
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
Flow Chart or Process Flow Chart
Interrelationship Diagram
Matrix Diagram
Multivoting
Nominal Group Technique
Plan–Do–Study–Act
Prioritization Matrix
Process Decision Program Chart
Root Cause Analysis
6S
Spaghetti Diagram
Supplier Input Process Output Customer
Tree Diagram
Value Stream Mapping
Voice of the Customer
Leading Change and Teamwork
Types of Teams
Steering Committees
When to Use Teams
How Teams Develop and Grow
Characteristics of Effective Teams
Evaluating Team Performance
Aligning Incentives to Advance Quality
Basics of Motivation
What Employees Say
Setting Up an Incentives and Reward System
Sharing Successes of Teams, Projects, and Initiatives
Recognition and Quality Awards
Recognition of Internal Customers
Organizational Learning and Training
Determining Education and Training Needs
Fundamentals of Performance Improvement Curriculum
Requisite Skills to Lead Performance and Process Improvement Efforts
Summary
References
Suggested Reading & Other Resources
Online Resources
Abstract
Through understanding performance and process improvement principles, healthcare quality professionals can apply evidence-based techniques to ensure quality and safety in their healthcare organizations. This section provides an overview of the historical development of performance and process improvement as well as the key principles and practices for performance improvement (PI) in healthcare quality and safety. The tenets of quality and safety must first be established through strategic planning to better align the activities with the organization’s mission, vision, values, goals, and objectives. Important to an organization’s success is the establishment of priorities for quality and PI activities, translating strategic goals into quality outcomes, and aligning organizational culture and structure to support quality. A formal quality and PI program with a defined scope and infrastructure is required to evaluate projects and performance toward desired goals. Fundamentals of a quality and PI program are described including tools and methods for use by healthcare quality professionals. An overview of teams and their roles and responsibilities is provided (e.g., team effectiveness, process champions, and process owners). Approaches to sharing successes and evaluating external award opportunities are also reviewed.
Learning Objectives
1.Understand historical perspectives on healthcare quality and appreciate the contributions of the quality pioneers and visionaries.
2.Describe strategic planning and management considering current and evolving healthcare performance and process improvement approaches.
p. 134
p. 135
3.Create a quality and PI plan that establishes priorities for quality, safety, and PI activities, develop action plans and projects, and provide training on performance and process improvement, program development, and evaluation.
4.Establish methods for evidence-based practice (EBP) guidelines, critical pathways, and effective team building.
5.Identify opportunities for rewards, awards, and recognition for healthcare organizations and understand different ways to share organizational and personal successes (e.g., presentations, storyboards, and publications).
The Evolution of Healthcare Quality
There are individuals in the history of quality and PI who were influential in shaping current performance and process improvement approaches and techniques. Early pioneers viewed process as a sequence of activities and communications that fulfilled a service need for a client or customer and improving a process to yield quality outcomes.1 These early pioneers are briefly presented with their major contributions to the development of quality and performance management.
Quality Pioneers
Walter Shewhart. In the 1920s, Walter Shewhart, a statistician at Bell Telephone Laboratories, developed the Shewhart Cycle, best known as plan–do–check–act (PDCA). This four-step process is designed to continuously improve quality (FIG. 3-1). The PDCA steps include the following:
Plan.
Question the capacity or capability of a process. Pose theories on how to improve the process and predict measurable outcomes.
Do.
Make changes on an experimental, pilot basis.
Check.
Measure outcomes compared to predicted outcomes.
Act.
Implement the changes on a broad scale.1
Figure 3-1 The traditional plan–do–check–act model.
Later, Deming adapted the PDCA cycle as the plan–do–study–act (PDSA) cycle; therefore, it also is referred to as the Deming Cycle, or the Deming Wheel. Both PDCA and PDSA are used as improvement models. Shewhart is also credited with his work on statistical process control (SPC) charts.
W. Edwards Deming. W. Edwards Deming is probably the most famous of the industrial quality gurus. A statistician with doctorates in mathematics and physics, he ultimately became the “philosopher of quality” and the learning organization. The story of post–World War II America’s rejection of Deming’s quality exhortations—and of his subsequent dealings with a receptive Japan—led to his being referred to as the “father of the third wave of the industrial revolution.”2(p2) In the 1950s, Deming visited the Western Electric Hawthorne Plant in Chicago while the Harvard University study regarding motivation of workers was in progress (hence the term “Hawthorne Effect” was coined from this work). Following this experience, he proposed replacing traditional management techniques with a statistically controlled management process to determine when—and when not—to intervene in a process.
SPC techniques allow management to determine a range of random variation that always occurs in a process. SPC describes two types of causes of variation: common cause and special cause. Common-cause problems are rooted in basic processes and systems. Special-cause problems stem from isolated occurrences that are outside the system. SPC is discussed in Health Data Analytics and further explains how to understand control limits and define common- and special-cause variation. Deming said that 85% of the problems detected are process or system related, whereas 15% are traceable to individuals; this is known as the “85/15
p. 135
p. 136
theory.”3 Deming’s management philosophy is based on his 14 points for businesses that seek to be competitive:
1.Create a constancy of purpose toward quality improvement (QI).
2.Adopt a philosophy that expects good products and services.
3.Cease dependence on mass inspection, and build quality into the product or service.
4.Do not award business solely on price tag.
5.Improve constantly the system of production and service.
6.Institute on-the-job training.
7.Institute leadership with an arm to help people and machines do better jobs.
8.Drive out fear.
9.Break down barriers between departments.
10.Eliminate slogans, exhortations, and targets.
11.Eliminate number quotas and management by objective and substitute leadership.
12.Remove barriers to pride of workmanship.
13.Institute education and self-improvement.
14.Take action to accomplish the transformation.3,4
Joseph Juran. Juran’s background was in engineering and law. He followed Deming to Japan after World War II, emphasizing the key role of top organizational leadership and the importance “to lean on each other to help the other succeed.”5(p1) In Juran on Leadership for Quality,6 Juran states that quality is “product performance that results in customer satisfaction; freedom from product deficiencies which avoid customer dissatisfaction.”6(pp16,31) This concept is known as fitness for use and is explained in Juran’s Trilogy. Juran stated that the cost of quality accounting means there is a break-even point of less than 100%. Beyond a certain point, the cost of providing quality exceeds the value of the incremental improvement in quality. Juran’s Trilogy is analogous to certain familiar financial processes. Quality planning is equal to budgeting, quality control (sometimes called measurement) is comparable to cost control, and quality and PI relate to cost reduction and margin improvement.1
Philip H. Crosby. In the 1970s and 1980s, Crosby developed an important concept known as the cost of [poor] quality. His work documented that high quality (what he terms “conformance to expectations”) is less costly than the waste and rework that characterizes poor-quality processes. Five stages of management maturity are identified by Crosby in his book, Quality Is Free.7 Crosby’s underlying philosophy is “Do it right the first time.” The stages are
1.uncertainty (when an organization is characterized by the statement, “We don’t know why we have quality problems”),
2.awakening,
3.enlightenment,
4.wisdom, and
5.certainty (reserved for organizations in which top management proclaims, “We know why we don’t have quality problems.” The mature company is equipped to initiate a QI program8).
Crosby also identified 14 steps to improve quality and move a company toward “certainty,” including the following:
Step 1. Management is committed to QI.
Step 2. A QI team is formed to oversee actions.
Step 3. Quality measurement is undertaken appropriate to the activities undergoing improvement.
Step 4. Quality cost is evaluated, using estimates as necessary.
Step 5. Quality awareness is promoted through various methods and supervisor involvement.
Step 6. Corrective actions are generated in response to steps 3 and 4.
Step 7. Zero-defects planning is tailored to the company and its products.
Step 8. Supervisory training is undertaken at all management levels.
Step 9. A zero-defects day is held to celebrate a new performance standard.
Step 10. Goals are set for individuals and groups.
Step 11. Error cause(s) is removed by management after notification.
Step 12. Goals are met and recognized.
Step 13. The quality council’s experiences, problems, and ideas are shared.
Step 14. The process is repeated (the pursuit of quality is never-ending).
Kaoru Ishikawa. Ishikawa was one of Deming’s early Japanese hosts and inventor of the cause-and-effect, or fishbone, diagram and is credited with using the term total quality control to imply not just the operational but also the total organizational commitment (marketing, finance, research) needed to fully actualize all components of the modern quality-committed organization. He along with Deming, Juran, and Crosby contributed to the development of total quality management.9
Healthcare Quality in the 21st Century
A timeline for the healthcare quality movement, which began in the 19th century and continues into the 21st century, is described herein and in FIGURE 3-2.
1863
Florence Nightingale, a nurse, calls for a systematic review of patient care.
1910
Codman proposes an end-result system of hospital standardization and Flexner publishes report calling for American medical schools to enact standards for teaching and research of the medical profession.
1918
The American College of Surgeons develops minimum standards for hospitals and conducts its first survey.
1950
Donabedian formulates a theoretical framework for patient care evaluation (structure, process, outcomes).
1951
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals founded by Codman introducing quality assurance standards for hospitals (later to become the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations and then The Joint Commission).
1960
Japan focuses on becoming a world quality leader; adopts the Deming management philosophy.
1970
Juran and Crosby build on Shewhart and Deming’s work; Plan–Do–Check–Act/Plan–Do–Study–Act cycles emerge.
1980
Berwick, Batalden, and James apply quality improvement (QI) methods to healthcare.
1996
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) enacted.
1999
Institute of Medicine releases the report, To Err Is Human.
2000
Six Sigma, Lean Enterprise, rapid-cycle improvements, safety, and pay for performance begin to have an impact on healthcare quality.
2001
The Committee on Quality of Health Care in America released Crossing the Quality Chasm for fundamental change to close the quality gap in the American healthcare system.
2002
Medicare begins a series of quality measurement and reporting initiatives starting with nursing homes, followed by home healthcare, and eventually hospitals and physicians.
2009
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act signed into law that included the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH).
2010
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act signed into law.
2011
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services releases the National Quality Strategy and present three aims to guide efforts to improve quality—Better Care, Healthy People/Healthy Communities, and Affordable Care.
2013
Institute of Medicine (IOM) releases report, Best Care at Lower Costs: The Path to Continuously Learning Health Care in America, looking at inefficiencies, an overwhelming amount of data, and other economic and quality barriers hinder progress in improving health and what is needed to achieve continuous improvement and better quality care at a lower cost.
Figure 3-2 Quality movement timeline.
p. 136
p. 137
The First Era: Nightingale, Codman, and the American College of Surgeons
In 1863, Florence Nightingale noted that patients seemed to fare better in some London hospitals than in others. As a nurse, she was the first to call for systematic inquiry into the nature of care processes that could be related to outcome variability. Although there is little evidence that Nightingale’s quality vision came to fruition during her lifetime, Boston surgeon Ernest Codman’s early 20th-­century efforts had a more formal impact. Codman, who also observed variability in patient outcomes among several hospitals, called for a systematic evaluation process with a view toward improving care.10 Although his efforts met considerable resistance, Codman’s ideas were embodied in the founding of the American College of Surgeons in 1913. This body of work set about the task of establishing quality standards. In 1917, the College established a five-part “minimum standard,” and the Hospital Standardization Program was born.11 These were the early beginnings for hospital accreditation based on standards. The program was based on Codman’s end-result system of standardization in which hospitals would track every patient treated for long enough to determine if the treatment was effective. When treatment was found to be ineffective, the hospital would attempt to determine how such similar cases could be treated with success in the future. Codman is best known for his focus on outcomes.
p. 137
p. 138
The Second Era: Donabedian and The Joint Commission’s Monitoring and Evaluation Process
Accreditation standards evolved slowly throughout the 1950s and early 1960s. At the academic level, the University of Michigan’s Dr. Avedis Donabedian examined existing research, formulating a theoretical framework for patient care evaluation.12 He is best recognized for his “structure, process, outcomes” model of quality evaluation (FIG. 3-3).
Structure
Process
Outcomes
Professionals
Leadership
Clinical
Facilities
Management
Functional
Technologies
Interaction
Experience
Resources
Diagnosis
Engagement
Organizations
Therapy
Figure 3-3 Donabedian’s framework.
This model suggests the importance of relating healthcare structures (qualifications of practitioners and facilities and technology available to them) and processes (activities involved in prevention, diagnosis, and treatment) to outcomes (how patients fare because of their care). In the past, Joint Commission standards mainly reflected the structure and process elements of this model. Surveyors, who reviewed the structures and processes, assessed hospital plans and technology, qualifications of clinicians and administrators, and organizational structures against the annually updated requirements contained in the Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals. Specialized standards for behavioral health and other services were also developed. Surveyors inferred process from documentation and discussion. They reviewed minutes and interviewed clinical and administrative leaders to ascertain whether designated individuals were following procedures and compliant with quality evaluation processes.
As a matter of policy and practical considerations, accreditation standards did not address patient outcomes directly. First, there were problems with the way “quality” was measured. Second, no professional consensus existed on systematic measures of patient outcomes. Finally, uniform and comparable clinical databases were nonexistent. The problems of measuring and interpreting patient outcomes precluded their practical use in accreditation. Consequently, the accreditation process was necessarily built on an implicit assumption that if proper structures and processes were in place, good outcomes were likely to follow. As measurement systems matured, the evaluation of patient outcomes became a strong focus for accreditation processes as well as the organizational review of different aspects of care, treatment, and services. Current accreditation processes are discussed in detail in Organizational Leadership.
The Third Era: Berwick, Batalden, and James “Discover” Deming, Juran, and “Japan, Inc.”
The names of Drs. Donald Berwick, Paul Batalden, and Brent James are eminent in the field of healthcare quality and performance management. Like many of their colleagues, these physicians were dissatisfied with traditional healthcare quality assurance (QA) practices. These pioneering physicians, however, went beyond a mere critique of existing QA. Both Berwick and Batalden researched the industrial methods publicized by the Japanese experience. Arising from this research, Berwick’s article describing healthcare QA as based upon the “Theory of the Bad Apples” became a classic.13 Among his many contributions, Batalden translated Deming’s famous 14 points7 into a healthcare context.14 In 1987, these two physicians played key roles in linking with The Juran Institute and a variety of industrial quality consultants to create the National Demonstration Project on Quality Improvement in Health Care. This multiyear project and its original 21 forward-looking healthcare organizations conclusively demonstrated the applicability of PI processes to healthcare.15
James, of the Intermountain Health System, was also a pioneer in applying QI processes directly to patients and clinical outcomes. The success of James and his team measured not only improved results in a single hospital but also across the entire multihospital system.16,17
In 1991, Berwick established the Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI), a not-for-profit organization that began driving improvements in healthcare. It accomplished this by supporting national projects focused on the six aims—safety, effectiveness, patient centeredness, timeliness, efficiency, and equity.18 Collaboratives are one approach involving many organizations trying to affect the same issue and using rapid-cycle improvement efforts to implement change. A major benefit of this approach is that the collaborating organizations share their experiences and improvements spread quickly. Projects initiated include improvements in patient safety, chronic care, critical care, and end-of-life care. Berwick was appointed administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) in 2010 and served for 18 months in President Obama’s administration. While in office, Berwick inculcated the “Triple Aim” into health policy: improving the patient care experience, improving population health, and reducing health costs. Dr. Berwick was also responsible for initiating major changes under the new health reform legislation.19
With more and more experience, the list of visionary leaders, both clinical and managerial, continues to grow as
p. 138
p. 139
evidenced by recent literature and presentations in public forums. Many healthcare organizations are taking the learnings from these leaders as well as newer methodologies and are advancing the science and experience of healthcare quality to serve as role models for others. For example, Virginia Mason led many lean initiatives by modeling the Toyota methods, and Catalysis (formerly ThedaCare Center for Healthcare Value) is sharing its lean journey.
The Fourth Era: Patient Is Front and Center of Quality and Safety with Growth of Advocacy, Engagement, and Activation
Healthcare reform stresses an imperative to engage families in their own care. Enhancing patient-centered care that results in empowerment, engagement, and activation is everyone’s job. Patients and their families need to understand their role and responsibilities related to quality and safety. Patient-centered communication is shown to improve clinical outcomes and more patient-centric technology tools are available, which have been found to be most useful in managing chronic disease.20,21
Patient advocacy includes addressing the rights and responsibilities of patients and involving them in shared decision making, obtaining informed consent for treatment, and disclosing unanticipated outcomes. An advocate or ombudsman is often available to manage inquiries, requests, complaints, and grievances, with a process to document and track reported issues to resolution. An ethical framework is often applied with ethics consultation to respond to issues that may create conflict with the rights of the patient and the organization or others. A patient’s bill of rights was first adopted by the American Hospital Association (AHA) in 1973 and revised in 1992 (FIG. 3-4). More recently, the AHA published The Patient Care Partnership replacing the Rights with a plain-language brochure.22 The protection of the patient rights may include a variety of concerns, such as abuse, neglect, and exploitation; decision-making ability and use of surrogates or durable power of attorney; advance directives or living wills; and treatment without fear of retaliation.
I. Information Disclosure
You have the right to receive accurate and easily understood information about your health plan, healthcare professionals, and healthcare facilities. If you speak another language, have a physical or mental disability, or just don’t understand something, assistance will be provided so you can make informed healthcare decisions.
II. Choice of Providers and Plans
You have the right to a choice of healthcare providers that is sufficient to provide you with access to appropriate, high-quality healthcare.
III. Access to Emergency Services
If you have severe pain, an injury, or sudden illness that convinces you that your health is in serious jeopardy, you have the right to receive screening and stabilization emergency services whenever and wherever needed, without prior authorization or financial penalty.
IV. Participation in Treatment Decisions
You have the right to know all your treatment options and to participate in decisions about your care. Parents, guardians, family members, or other individuals that you designate can represent you if you cannot make your own decisions.
V. Respect and Nondiscrimination
You have the right to considerate, respectful, and nondiscriminatory care from your doctors, health plan representatives, and other healthcare providers.
VI. Confidentiality of Health Information
You have the right to talk in confidence with healthcare providers and to have your healthcare information protected. You also have the right to review and copy your own medical record and request that your physician amend your record if it is not accurate, relevant, or complete.
VII. Complaints and Appeals
You have the right to a fair, fast, and objective review of any complaint you have against your health plan, doctors, hospitals, or other healthcare personnel. This includes complaints about waiting times, operating hours, the conduct of healthcare personnel, and the adequacy of healthcare facilities.
VIII. Consumer Responsibilities
Greater individual involvement by consumers in their care increases the likelihood of achieving the best outcomes and helps support a quality improvement, cost-conscious environment. Such responsibilities include the following:
I. Take responsibility for maximizing healthy habits, such as exercising, not smoking, and eating a healthy diet.
II. Become involved in specific healthcare decisions.
III.Work collaboratively with healthcare providers in developing and carrying out agreed-upon treatment plans.
IV.Disclose relevant information and clearly communicate your wants and needs.
V.Use your health plan’s internal complaint and appeal processes to address concerns that may arise.
VI.Avoid knowingly spreading disease.
VII. Recognize the reality of risks and limits of the science of medical care and the human fallibility of the healthcare professional.
VIII.Be aware of a healthcare provider’s obligation to be reasonably efficient and equitable in providing care to other patients and the community.
IX.Become knowledgeable about your health plan coverage and health plan options (when available) including all covered benefits, limitations, and exclusions, rules regarding use of network providers, coverage and referral rules, appropriate processes to secure additional information, and the process to appeal coverage decisions.
X. Show respect for other patients and health workers.
XI.Make a good-faith effort to meet financial obligations.
XII.Abide by administrative and operational procedures of health plans, healthcare providers, and Government health benefit programs.
XIII.Report wrongdoing and fraud to appropriate resources or legal authorities.
Figure 3-4 Patients’ bill of rights and responsibilities. (From Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, President’s Advisory Commission on Consumer Protection and Quality in Health Care Industry. Consumer Bill of Rights. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 1998. https://archive.ahrq.gov/hcqual/cborr/. Accessed May 1, 2017.)
p. 139
p. 140
Engagement is defined as “actions an individual must make to obtain the greatest benefit from the healthcare services available to them.”23(p2) Engaging patients produces better health outcomes.24–26 In this context, patient engagement involves an active process of synthesizing health information, recommendations of healthcare professionals, and personal beliefs and preferences to manage one’s illness. Advocacy, engagement, and activation—all offer opportunities for improved healthcare quality and safety in the 21st century. See Patient Safety for more discussion of engagement and activation.
Leadership and Performance Improvement
The development of meaningful governance in quality and safety requires assessment of the governing body’s knowledge of PI. This is a key role of quality professionals responsible for organizing and coordinating quality management and PI activities for the organization and its medical staff. Healthcare quality professionals can promote the commitment to quality of the governing body and organizational leadership by providing useful information in a format easily understood by members who may lack familiarity with healthcare terminology and procedures.
Fundamental Principles of Leadership
Leadership is the ability to influence an individual or group toward achievement of goals.27 Leadership and management are not identical. Leadership is determining the correct direction or path, whereas management is doing the correct things to stay on that path. Kotter28 notes that management is about coping with complexity through planning and budgeting; setting goals; organizing, staffing, and creating a structure to foster goal attainment; setting up mechanisms for monitoring; and controlling results. In contrast, leaders are responsible for coping with change by developing a vision for change and aligning the subsystems of the organization. Both strong leadership and management are necessary for high performance. Some people are great leaders but poor managers and vice versa; in some cases, a person may be successful in both roles.
Leadership Framework
There are many frameworks for leadership. As is true with the system framework, often it is less important to choose a framework than simply having one to guide behavior. Deming4 believed that managers were responsible for optimizing the system. Practices of exemplary leaders were explored by Kouzes and Posner,29 who identified five important general practices: inspire a shared vision, challenge the system, enable others to act, model the way, and encourage the heart. These principles are generic and therefore applicable to any type of organization. These five practices are one way of describing leadership.
1.Inspire a Shared Vision. For any change to be successful, leaders must provide a vision for quality and influence people to share that vision. This means getting people
p. 140
p. 141
to accept and believe in the core values underlying PI by developing a strong culture.
2.Challenge the System. Challenging the system means acting as a change agent for that vision. It also means recognizing good ideas and demonstrating a willingness to stretch and grow to improve the quality of care. This, too, involves adoption of core values as a learning organization.
3.Enable Others to Act. The third leadership practice is enabling others to act by sharing decision-making and power. Along with sharing power, enabling involves having an appropriate structural design and resources to support quality and safety initiatives.
4.Model the Way. Much behavior is learned through role modeling. Effective leaders must model desired behaviors as actions speak louder than words.
5.Encourage the Heart. The last practice is critical. Change is difficult, even if it is done for the right reasons. Encouraging the heart means recognizing contributions employees make and celebrating the core values and victories. The most important point of any reward system is to reward the desired behaviors.
Leaders use these five practices to keep subsystems aligned. However, leaders must first engage people to support a common vision of quality. One way this occurs is through a strong supportive culture of quality and safety. See Organizational Leadership for more information on leadership and culture, and their impact on performance and process improvement.
The Governing Body
The organization’s governing body or board of directors bears ultimate responsibility for setting policy, financial and strategic direction, and the quality of care and service provided by all its practitioners. Together with the organization’s management and medical staff leaders, the governing body sets priorities for QI activities.
The AHA outlined Principles of Accountability for Hospitals and Healthcare Organizations, with specific directives for governing board and leadership.30 These government and leadership directives are described in TABLE 3-1. A new document was published in 2015 with a joint American Hospital Association/American Medical Association (AHA/AMA) statement in Integrated Leadership for Hospitals and Health Systems: Principles for Success,31 which addresses integrated leadership and includes six principles:
Table 3-1 American Hospital Association’s (AHA) Principles of Accountability for Hospitals and Healthcare Organizations: Governance/Leadership
Mission and Vision. The organization’s governing body and leadership should articulate clearly defined mission and vision statements. With these statements as a foundation, the organization’s leadership should develop an action plan with specific goals, time frames for accomplishment, and linked measures of performance for a regular assessment of achievement, with oversight by the governing body. As part of this development process, the organization’s governing body and leadership should seek input from relevant stakeholders concerning their needs and interests relative to the organization. The plan and the results should be widely communicated to all individuals who are employed by or affiliated with the organization.
Executive Management Oversight. The organization’s governing body is responsible for the oversight of the organization’s leadership performance and should periodically evaluate that performance relative to the organization’s achievement of its stated strategic goals. As part of the process of evaluating the organization’s leadership, the governing body should periodically and systematically assess its own performance relative to defined goals and measures of performance.
Quality Oversight. The organization’s governing body and leadership, in conjunction with the clinical staff, are responsible for developing and implementing, in a comprehensive manner, systems and procedures for safeguarding and enhancing the quality of patient care and services. The governing body and leadership, in conjunction with the clinical staff, are also responsible for actively monitoring and immediately acting upon, where appropriate, the results derived from those systems and procedures such that patient and staff safety is ensured or improvements in patient care occur.
Financial Stability. The organization’s governing body is responsible for ensuring the financial well-being of the organization and, in conjunction with the organization’s leadership, for overseeing the appropriate and most optimal allocation of financial and physical resources for the improvement of patient care. The organization’s mission and duty to improve patient care and community health must not be obstructed by (and must take precedence over) the financial interests of individuals or groups employed by or affiliated with the organization.
Reprinted from American Hospital Association. Accountability—The Pathway to Restoring Public Trust and Confidence for Hospitals and Other Health Care Organizations, November 11–12, 1999:8, Chicago, IL: AHA; 1999, with permission.
1.Physician and hospital leaders who share values and expectations; aligned incentives; goals across the board with appropriate means of measuring them; responsibility for financial, cost and quality targets; accountable service line teams; strategic planning; and a focus on engaging patients as partners.
2.A structure incorporating all disciplines and supporting collaborative decision-making between doctors and hospital executives, with physicians maintaining their clinical autonomy.
p. 141
p. 142
3.Hospital and clinical leadership is integrated at all levels of the health system, and includes nursing and other caregivers, participating in all key management decisions.
4.The partnership between both sides is collaborative, participatory and built on trust, as Combes emphasized. Interdependence and a thrust toward achieving the Triple Aim is “crucial to alignment and engagement,” according to the report.
5.Transparency of both clinical and business information, across the entire enterprise, is also crucial.
6.Finally, integrated leadership requires an information technology (IT) system that allows clinicians to capture and report quality and performance data of all participants, with leadership holding its workforce accountable for those measurements.31
For practical purposes, day-to-day leadership is the responsibility of the CEO and senior management (collectively known as the C-Suite), elected or appointed members of the medical staff (e.g., chairs), and administrative and clinical staff (e.g., practitioners, quality and PI staff).
Organizational Strategy and Performance Management
The following discussion on performance management centers on the organizational level in the context of meeting the organization’s strategic goals and objectives. Performance management is defined as “a forward-looking process used to set goals and regularly check progress toward achieving those goals. In practice, an organization sets goals, looks at the actual data for its performance measures, and acts on results to improve the performance toward its goals.”32(p1) The goal of a performance management system is to make certain that the vision of the organization is being met by defining and measuring outcomes reflected in that vision.
Although there are a variety of quality and PI programs, including the Baldrige Performance Excellence Program and the European Foundation for Quality Management, many government agencies and Fortune 1000 companies use the balanced scorecard (BSC) as an approach to performance management. BSCs are completely compatible with other quality performance programs but go beyond such programs by embedding quality and PI in the strategic framework of the organization.33
The BSC was developed by Norton and Kaplan in the early 1990s. The basic idea is that performance measures provide a comprehensive view of organizational performance and not be overly dependent on a few choice indicators. Unlike other performance models, the BSC helps organizations better link long-term strategy with short-term activities.34
The BSC approach views the organization from four different perspectives or categories: financial (“How do we look to providers of financial resources?”), customer (“How do our customers see us?”), internal business processes (“At what must we excel?”), and learning and growth (“Can we continue to improve and create value for customers?”). Answers to these questions influence the nature of the strategic goals and objectives that are set and, ultimately, what performance measures are used. The critical aspect of performance indicators is that they must reflect the organization’s strategic goals and objectives.
There are likely to be several strategic objectives corresponding to each of the four perspectives. Each of these objectives has at least one measure with vetted measurement properties (e.g., reliability, validity, qualitative data, quantitative data) and can be collected through a variety of means (e.g., surveys, focus groups, patient chart reviews). Health Resources & Services Administration suggests that development and use of different types of measures (i.e., structure, process, outcomes) in each of the categories is an important “balanced” approach.32
The foundation for an organization’s strategic success begins with its people, who must be willing to learn and grow. To meet the changing needs of customers, they must, for example, learn new technology and acquire new skills to take on new responsibilities. The strategic goal “Develop a state-of-the-art program for breast cancer detection and treatment” could consider measures such as
•structure: quantity of imaging equipment;
•process: number of patients diagnosed with imaging technology; and
•outcome: higher percentage of early diagnoses, due to use of imaging technology.
It is necessary to monitor and improve key processes so that employees can convert learning and growth into products and services or quality outcomes. “Be recognized as one of the top healthcare providers in the community” could be another strategic goal. Measures might include
•structure: resources available for care delivery (e.g., nurse–patient ratio);
•process: care (how patients are diagnosed and treated); and
•outcomes: results of care (e.g., satisfaction, length and quality of life, turnover rates).
Just as different organizational levels and units develop goals and objectives based on corporate strategy, different levels and units also can use the BSC or similar dashboard approach. The use of a scorecard or dashboard to reflect an organization’s key strategic goals or priorities or “pillars” is still in active use but terms often morph over time. A review of these concepts can be noted by reviewing Baldrige healthcare recipients in which results are focused on patient safety and quality as key perspectives, not just the traditional BSC perspectives.
p. 142
p. 143
Note: for the same strategic goal (e.g., be recognized as one of the top healthcare providers in the community) there are several measures of performance across different perspectives.
Structure for Performance and Process Improvement
Every organization should have an organization-wide plan for PI. The plan defines examples of key activities or core processes and quality control methods for each service. There are numerous federal, state, and local-level regulations and accreditation standards that govern quality monitoring, evaluation, and reporting. This is especially true for diagnostic services such as pathology and laboratory services, radiology, nuclear medicine, and pharmacy. Content experts in these services lead the identification of regulations or other requirements and the specific quality control processes and measures that must be maintained. The requirements may include provisions for employee exposure monitoring, including issuance of individual radiology badges or devices. Quality and performance management personnel are often involved in the direct monitoring within services or the aggregation of data or reports from different services in the organization. The unit or service level is considered a microsystem, and it is at this level that change happens and improvements generally occur. The service-level plan includes
•identifying populations served;
•describing services provided;
•PI priorities at the service level, aligned with the organization’s goals and strategic plan;
•identifying any requirements related to PI, quality control, and quality monitoring (e.g., accreditation standards, regulations, device monitoring, quality control);
•selecting valid and reliable metrics for the service;
•developing a monitoring plan (e.g., sample, frequency, reporting);
•developing a plan for evaluating performance; and
•identifying methods for improving the performance.
A standard format can make the development of plans or quality monitoring across multiple services and sites more efficient and effective for tracking, trending, and reporting. The service-level plan should support the organization-wide plan which identifies the framework for all services, organization-level priorities and goals, resources, and metrics. Discussion of the different aspects to consider in the planning process for PI follows.
Setting Priorities
The road to quality healthcare begins with strategic planning to guide the organization in focusing on the most important aspects or priorities. Priorities for performance and process improvement activities are based on several standard approaches. The first approach is that the priorities are aligned with the organization’s strategic direction to maximize resources for improvement, and the second is a criteria-based approach considering risk, volume, problem proneness, patient safety, cost, customer satisfaction, and other criteria established specifically by the organization. The pillars identified by Studer are also often used as the categories of improvement priorities: Quality, People, Finance, Service, Growth and Community.35 In some organizations, safety has recently been added to the pillars of excellence model.
A framework for leadership of improvement is the first step in turning the strategic plan into an operational plan for improvement. In this framework, leaders apply the mission, vision, values, and strategic plan to set direction. This framework is built on a foundational leadership team to support improvement capability. The three components of will to prepare for change, ideas to generate new ways of performing, and execution of change contribute to a leadership system for improvement. Models depicting the framework and how the framework operates in an integrated system are shown in FIGURES 3-5 and 3-6.
Figure 3-5 Framework for leading improvement. (Reprinted from Reinertsen JL, Bisognano M, Pugh MD. Seven Leadership Leverage Points for Organization-Level Improvement in Health Care. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: Institute for Healthcare Improvement; 2011, with permission.)
Figure 3-6 Leadership framework as an integrated system. (Reprinted from Institute for Healthcare Improvement. Building a system of leadership for improvement. In: A Framework for Leadership for Improvement. Cambridge, MA: IHI; 2006:4, with permission. www.knowledge.scot.nhs.uk/media/CLT/ResourceUploads/4012931/IHILeadershipFramework_FEB2006versionFINAL.pdf.)
Prioritizing evaluates key processes against key business drivers to identify the most important processes to improve and measure in evaluating performance. Applying priorities determines the initiation of an improvement action, based on the analysis of data collection. The goals and drivers of the system are depicted in FIGURE 3-7. Leaders identify a priority list of processes or services for improvement.36 Healthcare quality professionals facilitate development of priorities by
Figure 3-7 Cascading series of goals and drivers for improvement. (Reprinted from Reinertsen JL, Bisognano M, Pugh MD. Seven Leadership Leverage Points for Organization-Level Improvement in Health Care. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: Institute for Healthcare Improvement; 2011:14, with permission.)
•establishing criteria for priority assessment (e.g., volume, risk, problem proneness);
•using data on past performance to assess gaps (internal performance);
•using external drivers for consideration (new regulations, standards);
•providing information to leaders with a basis for recommendations;
•using tools to create a matrix for priorities for decision making,
•involving key stakeholders for input; and
•identifying internal and external requirements that influence priorities.
In addition, healthcare quality professionals and their teams use the described criteria to prioritize performance and process improvement activities based on the quantitative and qualitative data available to them. By using past performance, aligned with the criteria and strategic initiatives, the team can determine the priorities for action. A plan is often written by healthcare quality professionals and approved by the clinical leaders to ensure success of the activities, especially in allocating adequate resources for the effort.
p. 143
p. 144
The initiatives having the most opportunity for improvement are often tackled first. Usually, the initiatives selected focus on core clinical processes, high-risk processes, high-risk patients and populations, high-risk medications, or high-risk actions or interventions. The level of risk is based on the potential consequences of injury or harm to patients. In an acute care hospital setting, a high-risk process might be blood transfusions, while in long-term care it might be fall prevention, and within an office practice, it might be ensuring timely immunizations. Healthcare quality professionals need to identify those processes for specific settings.
Another aspect in assessing level of risk is the frequency with which the process or procedure is performed. For example, responding to a case of sepsis or malignant hyperthermia would be considered high risk for the patient, and if the staff does not manage this scenario often, they may not respond as a highly effective team. Therefore, it may be a priority to perform drills to ensure that staff is competent. Managing
p. 144
p. 145
high-risk patients and processes significantly affect morbidity and mortality. Examples of high-risk processes include
•core processes: admission, transfer, discharge, transitions, coordination of care, other handoffs;
•high-risk processes: medication delivery or administration, surgery, resuscitation;
•high-risk patients: patients with reduced renal function, immunocompromised patients, neonates, patients in critical care units, suicidal patients, dementia patients at risk for wandering;
•high-risk medications: heparin (and oral anticoagulants), insulin, chemotherapy, opiates, neuromuscular blocking agents, psychotropics; and
•high-risk actions and interventions: blood and blood product transfusions, use of restraints, extracorporeal circulation, moderate sedation.37
After priorities are established, specific initiatives or activities are undertaken. Key steps to implementing PI activities to ensure success of the PI priorities follow:
1.Ensure leadership support and commitment for the PI initiative.
2.Assess priority and feasibility of initiative based on risk, resources, leadership support, and organizational strategies.
3.Identify the aim of the initiative and include the topic, process, or problem to be improved (provide a good rationale).
4.Convene an interdisciplinary team of content and process experts with all key disciplines as participants (involve all the right stakeholders with a champion for change).
5.Use tools and techniques to analyze processes, best practices, research, and consensus-based evidence for the desired change.
6.Develop the change to be implemented and add timelines and accountability for the project.
7.Identify the measures to demonstrate that the change resulted in improvement; set performance goals.
8.Educate staff on the desired change.
9.Implement and test the change via the redesigned processes.
10.Collect, analyze, and evaluate data on the redesigned process.
11.Make additional changes based on findings and disseminate to all areas.
12.Report and display results to reward staff for improvements.
13.Continue to monitor performance to ensure that the change is sustained.
14.Compare performance internally and externally.
15.Celebrate successes internally and externally.37,38
p. 145
p. 146
When choosing between improvement activities, use a prioritization matrix (FIG. 3-8) to assist in evaluating the items against specific criteria. After leaders determine the improvement priorities for process improvement, they make decisions about the need to organize a team. A prioritization matrix organizes tasks, issues, or actions and prioritizes them based on agreed-upon criteria. The tool is helpful in identifying criteria for specific priorities and applying a rating scale to help make decisions for the selection of specific activities. This matrix applies options under discussion to the priority considerations of the organization. The tool combines the tree diagram and the L-shaped matrix diagram, displaying the best possible effect. The prioritization matrix is often used before more complex matrices are needed. This matrix applies options under discussion to the priority considerations of the organization.
High Risk
High Volume
Problem Prone
Cost
Customer Satisfaction
Regulatory
Total
Infection Rates
3
2
2
3
1
3
14
Surgical Complications
2
1
2
3
1
3
12
Emergency Department Time to Treatment
1
3
1
1
3
0
9
Falls with Injuries
2
1
1
2
2
2
10
Medication Safety
3
3
3
2
1
2
14
How to construct
1.Create an L-shaped matrix with identified areas on one side and evaluation criteria on the other side.
2.Prioritize and assign weights to the list of criteria that will be used in the prioritization. Define a scoring mechanism such as 1–3 or 1–5. In the example 1–3 is used with 1 = least important and 3 = most important.
3.Prioritize the list of options based on each criterion. Usually, key leaders come to agreement on the ratings.
4.Prioritize and select the items across all the criteria. Use the total scores to order the items from high to low.
When to use
When problems are identified and options must be narrowed down, when options have strong interrelationships, and when all options to be done but prioritization or sequencing is required
Figure 3-8 Prioritization matrix: clinical improvement priorities.
A project selection matrix ranks and compares potential project areas for implementation. Ranking criteria may include organizational and strategic goals, potential financial impact to the organization, effect on patient and employee satisfaction, likelihood of success, and completion within a specified time frame (see FIG. 3-9).
Low Cost
High Strategic Priority
Meets Accreditation Standards
MD Concern
Staff Concern
Total
Repair roof
3
4
2
3
4
16
Purchase new X-ray machine
5
2
0
1
5
13
Develop skilled nursing unit
4
1
0
2
2
9
Develop better communications with home health
2
3
1
4
3
13
Develop staff newsletter
1
5
3
5
1
15
How to construct
1.Create a L-shaped matrix with identified areas on one side and evaluation criteria on the other side.
2.Prioritize and assign weights to the list of criteria that will be used in the prioritization. Define a scoring mechanism such as 1–3 or 1–5. In the example, 1–5 is used with 1 = least important and 5 = most important.
3.Prioritize the list of options based on each criterion. Usually, key leaders come to agreement on the ratings.
4.Prioritize and select the item(s) across all the criteria. Use the total scores to order the items from high to low.
When to use
•When issues are identified and options must be narrowed down
•When options have strong interrelationships
•When options all need to be done, but prioritization or sequencing is needed
Figure 3-9 Prioritization matrix: decision example.
Action Plan and Project Development
Once priorities are identified, an action plan puts them into motion. A standard format includes
•who (accountability),
•what (specific actions or steps to be followed),
•when (time frame),
•status (progress made and ongoing monitoring), and
•completion (closure or closing the loop).
Projects vary greatly, ranging from improving a defined process to complete redesign or even designing a new process or system. Although the scope varies, the key format remains constant. The level of detail, number of steps, and length of time to complete will vary greatly. FIGURE 3-10 shows the framework for execution of plans for a PI project.39
Figure 3-10 Framework for execution. (Reprinted from Reinertsen JL, Bisognano M, Pugh MD. Seven Leadership Leverage Points for Organization-Level Improvement in Health Care. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: Institute for Healthcare Improvement; 2011:5, with permission.)
Planning and Evaluation of Improvement Projects and Activities
Healthcare quality professionals often guide the planning and evaluation for projects and activities. The first step is to understand data and tools to construct an overall plan and specifically the data collection plan. This includes the following steps:
1.Determine who, what, when, where, how, and why.
2.Structure the design.
3.Choose and develop a sampling method.
4.Determine learning needs and conduct training.
p. 146
p. 147
5.Delegate responsibilities.
6.Facilitate coordination.
7.Forecast budget.
8.Conduct pilots or tests of change.
A clear understanding of data and tools to assist in problem identification and solutions is needed to facilitate planning and evaluating improvement projects. An overview of data and data management is provided with some of the more common tools used in these processes later in this section.
Evaluation and Selection of EBP Guidelines
Evidence-based medicine (EBM) is the “conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients.”40(p71) Because multiple disciplines are involved in healthcare delivery, however, the term evidence-based practice (EBP) is more appropriate than EBM from a healthcare quality perspective. Clinicians not only base their care on the experimental evidence but also consider experiential evidence, physiologic principles, patient and professional values, and system features in their decision making.41 This allows individualized application and dissemination of aggregate research evidence.41,42
EBP promotes patient safety through the provision of effective and efficient healthcare, resulting in less variation in care and fewer unnecessary or nontherapeutic interventions.43 EBP and outcomes measurement are iterative; one facilitates the other.44 EBP complements the principles of continuous quality improvement (CQI). Outcome evaluation at the individual and aggregate level is an essential step in evaluating the impact of EBP.
p. 147
p. 148
Evidence-based quality management is based on two types of research: clinical research and health services research. Clinical research evaluates the impact of interventions on patient outcomes. Outcome measures may include clinical outcomes, functional outcomes, and patient satisfaction. This type of research assists healthcare quality professionals in determining clinical evidence-based best practices. Health services research evaluates the health system at the micro and macro levels. Results from this type of research guide healthcare quality professionals in improving work processes and systems of care.
To facilitate research-based practice—that is, to promote research use—healthcare quality professionals must collaborate with organizational leaders to promote a culture of excellence. Healthcare providers must be motivated to provide the best possible care and to use the best system processes based on the evidence in the research literature or on data obtained in their own organizations; they must want to strive for excellence. A key strategy is to keep all discussions based on improving the patient’s experience and outcomes and keep personality conflicts out of the conversation, based on previously established ground rules. Research use is a key aspect of the CQI process and critical to obtaining healthcare quality as defined by the Institute of Medicine (IOM).
The rating of evidence for EBP is often based on the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) levels of evidence and grading system. The USPSTF, created in 1984, is a group of independent experts in prevention and EBM that makes evidence-based recommendations about clinical preventive services. Evidence for practice can be classified by certain levels or strength of the evidence. The USPSTF also defined levels of certainty about net benefit (see TABLE 3-2). The USPSTF levels of evidence are often used to rate the evidence so that practitioners can make wise decisions about care and treatment options with some degree of certainty about outcomes. Strong evidence is transformed into practice and then measured in standardized formats. For example, there is strong evidence that timely administration of aspirin in acute myocardial infarction (AMI) decreases mortality. This practice was implemented widely, as in the Joint Commission Core Measure for AMI. As organizations achieved sustained performance, this measure was dropped. Over time as evidence is strengthened, measures will continue to evolve and organizations such as the Joint Commission and CMS and
p. 148
p. 149
others will modify requirements. The newest transition is to an electronic capture and submission of measures known as electronic Clinical Quality Measures. Organizations make practices operational by using clinical pathways, standard order sets, plans of care, and ongoing measurement processes.
Table 3-2 Levels of Certainty about Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate is constrained by factors such as:
•the number, size, or quality of individual studies,
•inconsistency of findings across individual studies,
•limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice, and
•lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large enough to alter the conclusion.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of:
•the limited number or size of studies,
•important flaws in study design or methods,
•inconsistency of findings across individual studies,
•gaps in the chain of evidence,
•findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice, and
•lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Note: The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.From U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Update on Methods: Estimating Certainty and Magnitude of Net Benefit. January 2017. https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/update-on-methods-estimating-certainty-and-magnitude-of-net-benefit.
Common sources for EBP guidelines and national measures are as follows:
•Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) (e.g., National Clinical Guideline),
•Cochrane (e.g., clinical evidence comparisons),
•Specialty professional associations and societies (e.g., American Cardiology Association),
•The Leapfrog Group (e.g., hospital-based measures), and
•National Quality Forum (NQF) (e.g., 29 Serious Reportable “Never” Events, Nurse Sensitive Measures, Ambulatory Sensitive Measures, Long-Term Care Measures, and Hospital Measures).
The USPSTF updated its definitions of the grades it assigns to recommendations and now includes suggestions for practice associated with each grade (TABLE 3-3). These definitions apply to USPSTF recommendations voted on after July 2012.
Table 3-3 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) Grade Definitions (After July 2012)
Grade
Definition
Suggestions for Practice
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate or there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected patients depending on individual circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I
Statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the clinical considerations section of USPSTF Recommendation Statement: If the service is offered, patients should understand the uncertainty about the balance of benefits and harms.
From U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Grade Definitions. June 2016. https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/grade-definitions.
Clinical Guidelines and Pathways
Clinical guidelines are consensus statements developed to assist in clinical management decisions, and clinical pathways are tools to manage quality outcomes and cost of care based on clinical guidelines and current evidence. Clinical pathways are document-based tools that provide a link between the best available evidence and clinical practice. Clinical pathways, also known as care pathways, critical pathways, integrated care pathways, or care maps, are one tool used to manage the quality in healthcare concerning the standardization of care processes. A variety of terms are used for this tool. For simplicity, the term clinical pathway is used here.
Clinical pathways support EBP and clinical guidelines in a time-oriented plan. The use of pathways or guidelines reduces variation of clinical practice to optimize patient outcomes. The concept was introduced in 1985 by Zander and Bower at the New England Medical Center in Boston. They were early nursing pioneers in applying process management thinking and techniques to improve patient care.45 Clinical pathways operationalize evidence into daily practice for patient care. They are intended to create an integrated comprehensive approach or plan to the patient’s care rather than individual professions functioning independently. Interdisciplinary communication, collaboration, and teamwork are enhanced by working from one pathway, and continuity and care coordination are achieved for the patient.
The pathway shapes expectations or outcomes of care as the patient progresses, based on what is the best practice for most patients most of the time. The pathway is written in a manner to ensure that actions or interventions are completed at designated points with the expected outcome. They are designed to support clinical management, clinical and nonclinical resource management, audit management, and
p. 149
p. 150
financial management. Often, the improved clinical outcomes are intended to support cost-effective use of resources such as length of stay, diagnostic tests, and pharmaceutical management. Because there are differences in the responses for the same condition or treatment, individual variances must be captured, documented, and addressed. This continuous monitoring and data evaluation component is essential to pathway improvement through continual revision of pathways. It is expected that over time variation decreases through standardization, costs decrease, and the value of care improves.
Although standardization is important to the pathways, they are not intended to be overly prescriptive and still allow personalized care. However, one critique of pathways is that not all variation in patient care is negative, and standardized care or “cookbook medicine” would be a detriment to patient care and clinician autonomy. Individual patient factors may contribute to variation that cannot be controlled by the system. Pathways tend to address processes in the ideal or uncomplicated patient and may not address problems in most patients. It is important to identify which patients are appropriate for the pathway. In general, pathways are more applicable to patients with uncomplicated illnesses undergoing procedures or surgery. Complex cases with multiple co-morbidities may be more difficult to fit into a standard pathway.
The standardized approach is designed to empower patients such that each patient knows the plan and his or her expected outcome at each phase of recovery (e.g., on postoperative day 2, the hip replacement patient is expected to ambulate a defined number of steps or feet and void without a urinary catheter). Standardization also helps reduce clinical risk by ensuring that for specific conditions there are no lapses in care to be provided, and if outcomes are not met there is an immediate assessment of the reason. When differences or unwanted variances do occur, they are noted and accommodations made in the plan of care to ensure safety and effectiveness. Some common areas addressed by clinical pathways include orthopedic surgery such as hips, knees, and shoulders. Surgical care is more conducive to clinical pathways than medical conditions, where more differences in the patient’s condition are more likely to occur.
Clinical pathways facilitate the development of standardized physician order sets, interventions for the patient, and documentation of the patient’s condition, and they are often used in the following situations:
•prevalent pathology in the care setting (e.g., pain);
•pathology with a significant risk for patients (e.g., venous thromboembolism), high cost for the hospital (e.g., total hip joint replacement), or well-defined permitting homogeneous care (e.g., laminectomy, transurethral prostate resection);
•predictable clinical course (e.g., total knee or hip replacement);
•possibility of obtaining professional agreement (e.g., coronary angioplasty);
•existence of recommendations of good practices or expert opinion (e.g., diabetes);
•multidisciplinary implementation (e.g., joint replacement); and
•relatively mature guidelines (e.g., stroke).46
Although based on current evidence or clinical guidelines, the clinical pathway details the process of care for the specific condition and, in noting any variances, highlights inefficiencies. Twenty-seven studies involving 11,398 participants were included in a meta-analysis of clinical pathway effectiveness.47 Twenty studies compared stand-alone clinical pathways to usual care. These studies indicated a reduction in inhospital complications and improved documentation. There was no evidence of differences in readmission to hospital or inhospital mortality. Length of stay was the most commonly employed outcome measure with most studies reporting significant reductions. A decrease in hospital costs or charges was also observed. Seven studies compared clinical pathways as part of a multifaceted intervention with usual care. No evidence of differences was found between intervention and control groups.
There are both strengths and limitations of the pathway process that an organization must consider in its development and use of the tool. The development of a clinical pathway includes the following steps:
1.Select the topic. The topic concentrates on high-volume, high-cost diagnoses and procedures; higher mortality; longer length of stay; or greater number of outcome variations. Surgical procedures are more suitable for pathways because of the predictable course of events that occur during the hospitalization.
2.Select a multidisciplinary team, including representatives from all groups that would be affected by the pathway. Without physician support of the pathway, it is unlikely to be successful and achieve any of the stated goals.
3.Evaluate and map the current process of care for the condition or procedure to identify current variation and create an idealized process.
4.Evaluate the current evidence in the literature. In the absence of best practices, comparison with other organizations, or benchmarking, is the best method to use.
5.Determine the clinical pathway form. This may be a hardcopy checklist placed in the patient’s medical record or at bedside or an electronic tool capable of tracking variances.
6.Educate all users on how to use the tool and implement it. It is critical to define roles within the pathway for it to be successful.
7.Document and analyze variances that do not meet the expectation of the pathway. Identification of factors that
p. 150
p. 151
contribute to variance and interventions to improve those factors are the key features of process improvement. Often, a case manager or other utilization management staff member collects data on use of the pathway and variances. These data must then be analyzed and processes improved to achieve cost savings, quality and safety.
A clinical practice guideline (CPG) is defined in a very structured manner by the Institute of Medicine as a “statement that includes recommendations that intend to optimize patient care. They are informed by a systematic review of evidence and an assessment of the benefits and harms of alternative care options.”48(pp25–26) A medical guideline (also called a clinical guideline, clinical protocol, or CPG) is a document with the aim of guiding decisions and criteria regarding diagnosis, management, and treatment in specific areas of healthcare. Following a guideline is never mandatory.
The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) is a publicly available database of evidence-based CPGs and related documents.49 It provides Internet users with free online access to guidelines. The NGC is updated weekly as evidence is acknowledged and subject matter experts review guidelines for practice. The key components of the NGC include
•structured, standardized abstracts (summaries) about each guideline and its development;
•a utility for comparing attributes of two or more guidelines in a side-by-side comparison;
•syntheses of guidelines covering similar topics, highlighting areas of similarity and difference;
•links to full-text guidelines, where available, and/or ordering information for print copies; and
•annotated bibliographies on guideline development methodology, structure, implementation, and evaluation.
Guidelines are organized by clinical specialty areas such as Cardiology, Critical Care, Emergency Medicine, Geriatrics, Infectious Diseases, Pediatrics, Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and Psychiatry. An example of a CPG from the nursing specialty is Prevention of Falls (acute care) and includes recommendations, scope, methodology, evidence, benefits/harms, qualifying statements, implementation, IOM/NQF report categories, identifying information and any disclaimers. Users of the CPG can check the site periodically as evidence is updated to ensure practice is following the most current evidence.
Another tool to apply evidence into practice to improve healthcare quality is the concept of “bundles.”50 The IHI developed the concept of the bundle in 2001, and it is now commonly used for selected conditions. The original initiative was a joint development of the IHI and the Voluntary Hospitals of America (VHA), focused on improving critical care and increasing reliability of processes and thereby improve outcomes. (*Note that in 2015 the VHA and University HealthSystem Consortium merged as Vizient, Inc.). A bundle is defined as “a small set of evidence-based interventions for a defined patient segment/population and care setting that, when implemented together, result in significantly better outcomes than when implemented individually.”50(pp1–2) There are guidelines to the bundle design that include the following:
•The bundle has three to five interventions (elements), with strong clinician agreement.
•Each bundle element is relatively independent.
•The bundle is used with a defined patient population in one location.
•The multidisciplinary care team develops the bundle.
•Bundle elements are descriptive rather than prescriptive, which allows for local customization and use of clinical judgment.50(p5)
The first two bundles included ventilator-associated events and central line-associated bloodstream infections (CLABSI). Through ongoing testing and application of the bundles in clinical practice, modifications were made to the original elements and new bundles developed such as the sepsis bundle and perinatal care bundle. “The use of bundles of care interventions as an approach to improving the reliability of care received by patients and preventing certain serious clinical outcomes has been demonstrated successfully for nearly 10 years, with a growing body of published results.”50(pp2–5)
When assessing processes of bundle use and outcomes, an “all or none” measurement is used to ensure reliability in providing care that offers the best evidence to prevent adverse events and improve outcomes. Often healthcare quality professionals are directly involved in data collection or reporting of bundle compliance as well as the outcomes of care such as ventilator-associated events or CLABSI—key measures of harm to patients.
Performance and Process Improvement Approaches
Definitions and requirements for quality and PI in healthcare evolved over the past decades. In the early 1950s, quality care reviews were conducted exclusively by individual physicians using an unstructured and subjective process that relied on the practitioner’s knowledge and experiences. Between 1950 and 1960, the responsibility for quality of care expanded beyond the physician to include both the hospital and the board of directors. Two significant legal decisions marked this transition period:
•Bing v. Thunig (1957). In this case, the New York Court of Appeals ruled that the doctrine of charitable immunity no longer applied to hospitals; hospitals are liable for patient injuries sustained through negligence of employees.
p. 151
p. 152
•Darling v. Charleston Community Memorial Hospital (1965). In this important corporate negligence case, the court ruled that the hospital had a legal responsibility to protect a patient from harm by others by overseeing the quality of patient care.
These cases shifted the thinking about accountability for safety and quality of care delivered by hospitals and set into motion the beginning of quality reviews. This progressed over time into current PI models. There are a variety of PI models and they each have value and usefulness depending on the type of problem, scope, and solution needed. The process for determining which PI model or models to use in an organization requires an analysis of the organization and its track record of success with current and previous models. How will the model be communicated across the organization? Are all staff members expected to know how to use it? Which model or models are a good fit with the culture and the current strategies that are working?
Healthcare quality professionals may be asked to provide a review and analysis of the PI methodology currently in use and compare it with alternative options. As more sophisticated tools and methods become available, the quality professionals must keep pace and serves an important role in the final selection(s) of what tools to use in which situations—the best tool for the right situation at the right time.
Retrospective Audits
A shift from physician review to medical audits occurred in 1955. Medical audits included a systematic procedure using objective, valid criteria with an orientation on outcomes. In 1966, there was a major change whereby the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals (as it was called then; now The Joint Commission or TJC) focused on optimal, not minimal, standards of care. In 1975, the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals (JCAH) published the quality of professional services standards, requiring hospitals to demonstrate optimal care using valid and reliable measures. Although optimal was never defined, this new focus led to one-time audits of care, known as performance evaluation programs audits. While audits have historical roots, they are still a method often used depending on the type of information to be validated.
Quality Assurance
Audits soon led to a preoccupation with meeting audit number requirements. Thus, in 1980 the JCAH, now known as TJC, developed the first QA standards requiring a problem-focused approach to measuring quality. This approach required organizations to identify and monitor problem areas. The combined strengths of criteria-based audits and the epidemiologic approach used in infection control in the 1980s resulted in a new focus on systematic monitoring and evaluation in 1985. From this, a 10-step process for quality and PI evolved in 1986 requiring organizations to evaluate important aspects of care and then use the results to identify opportunities for improvement.
Reengineering and System Redesign
In the 1990s, reengineering was one of the major initiatives in hospitals. Most of these efforts were focused on workforce redesign. There was typically a focus on restructuring or redesigning systems and departments into more efficient processes. For example, hospitals experimented with creating new positions that combined work from several different areas. A focus on cross-functional capabilities led to the dissolution of departmental silos. A “patient service associate” or “technical associate” would deliver meals, clean patient rooms, stock supplies, and provide patient transportation. Many hospitals thought that reengineering would increase profit margins and create financial stability. The problem was that reengineering often became associated with mergers, acquisitions, downsizing, and layoffs. When this happened, employee morale declined and productivity suffered. Because of these negative connotations, reengineering fell out of vogue and was replaced by other improvement models and initiatives. The newer approach is to consider adopting the Lean Enterprise method to increase financial stability by eliminating waste.
The key components and tools of a Lean Enterprise include identifying value (value stream mapping and voice of customer), eliminating waste, establishing flow, enabling pull (instead of push) systems, and pursuing perfection. The Six Sigma method includes a five-step process: Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve, and Control (DMAIC). See TABLE 3-4 for the process and key questions for the healthcare quality professional to consider during each step in the DMAIC process. Lean Enterprise and Six Sigma are often complementary tools. Lean Enterprise focuses on dramatically improving flow in the value stream and eliminating waste to improve efficiency and speed. Six Sigma methodology focuses on eliminating defects and reducing variation in processes to improve effectiveness.
Table 3-4 The DMAIC Methodology
Phase
Key Questions
Common Tools
Define
•What is the problem?
•Why are we working on this project?
•Who is going to be working on this project?
•What resources do we need to complete this project? What is the scope?
•By when must the project be completed?
•Who is the customer?
•Who are key stakeholders?
•What key metrics are important?
•What does the current process look like?
Project Charter
SIPOC
Voice of the Customer
Run Chart
Process/Flow Map
Measure
•How can we measure the process or performance?
•What data sources are available, and what is the data collection method?
•What is our current or baseline performance of the process? What data display (graphs) is useful?
•What does our customer define as a defect?
•How can we stratify data or measure defects?
•What benefits do we hope to achieve through solving this problem?
Control Charts
Pareto
Histogram
Other Analysis
Analyze
•Why is there a gap between current performance and customer expectations?
•What are the root causes of variability in our processes and have they been verified?
•What root causes are the highest priority to focus efforts?
•Where is waste in the process and what type of waste?
Process Map
Value Stream Map
Risk Analysis
Cause-and-Effect Diagram (Fishbone/Ishikawa Diagram)
Improve
•What are potential solutions to the root causes?
•What solutions have been verified and are the highest priority?
•How will we track implementation?
•Are there any anticipated barriers to improvement?
•How can we best translate the details into standard work expectations?
•What will the redesigned process look like and how will it be tested, measured, and validated?
•Does the redesigned process reduce waste or variation?
Brainstorming
Risk Analysis
Standard Work
Mistake Proofing
Visual Workplace Tools
Control
•How will the improved process be sustained?
•Who will be responsible for maintaining/monitoring the improvements and measures?
•How will we communicate the new process expectations?
•How will we eliminate deviations from standard work and prevent backsliding?
•How will we share best practices and lessons learned?
•What were the benefits realized from the project?
Control Plan
Control Charts
Dashboard
Standard Operating Procedures and Policy Revision
Checklist/Audits
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) established the national Health Care Fraud and Abuse Control Program (HCFAC) under the joint direction of the Attorney General and the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS). In the latest HCFAC report,51 the following successes were noted for healthcare fraud and abuse during FY 2016:
•The Federal Government won or negotiated over $2.5 ­billion in healthcare fraud judgments and settlements.
p. 152
p. 153
•Investigations conducted by the HHS Office of Inspector General (HHS-OIG) resulted in 765 criminal actions against individuals or entities that engaged in crimes related to Medicare and Medicaid.
•There were 690 civil actions, which included false claims and unjust-enrichment lawsuits filed in federal district court.
•HHS-OIG also excluded 3,635 individuals and entities from participation in Medicare, Medicaid, and other federal healthcare programs. Among these were exclusions based on criminal convictions for crimes related to
⚬Medicare and Medicaid (1,362),
⚬other healthcare programs (262),
⚬patient abuse or neglect (299), and
⚬result of licensure revocations (1,448).
The HCFAC is in its twentieth year of operation and continues to use a collaborative approach to “identify and
p. 153
p. 154
prosecute the most egregious instances of healthcare fraud, to prevent future fraud and abuse, and to protect program beneficiaries.”51(p1)
Rapid-Cycle Improvement
The IHI developed the “collaborative” approach, termed the “Breakthrough Series,” to bring about rapid-cycle improvements. Fundamental to the collaborative approach is the acceptance of a model and the establishment of an infrastructure through which collaborating organizations can identify and prioritize aims for improvement and gain access to methods, tools, and materials to conduct sophisticated, evidence-based activities that they could not successfully conduct on their own. The key elements of success are enlisting a broad range of partners, using EBP to improve quality of care, and developing toolkits that contain essential information and resources to manage change.
At the core of the collaborative approach is the PDCA cycle that builds on incremental improvements. The real benefits to organizations that participate in the Breakthrough Series are that they can learn from other organizations’ successes and failures. Another key principle in the IHI approach is the concept of spread. IHI proposed that successful small-scale improvement efforts initially affect an individual organization and spread later to the industry (i.e., other hospitals) and eventually to the entire national healthcare system. The spread is fostered through learning sessions in which organizations share their experiences. The IHI approach also can be adapted to a single organization (the work begins in a few units or teams and then is spread to other units and, eventually, to the entire organization). See FIGURE 3-11, which illustrates how the multiple improvement cycles in a collaborative occur.52 Participation in a collaborative is one approach that organizations may choose for improvement in a specific area. The IHI is one organization that offers national 10 to 12 month collaboratives such as Reducing Falls and Falls with Injuries; Transforming Care at the Bedside (TCAB); Health Disparities; Primary Care Teams to Meet Patients’ Medical and Behavioral Needs; Perinatal Improvement in Community; IHI Triple Aim Improvement Community; and Improving Outcomes for High-Risk and Critically Ill Patients.
Figure 3-11 Process for testing multiple cycles of change as used in a collaborative. (Reprinted from Institute for Healthcare Improvement. How to Improve: Science of Improvement: Testing Multiple Changes. Cambridge, MA: IHI; 2017, with permission. http://www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/HowtoImprove/ScienceofImprovementTestingMultipleChanges.aspx.)
Six Sigma
Six Sigma is a business management strategy, originally developed by Motorola. This rigorous methodology, used in many different industry sectors, uses data and statistical analyses to measure and improve performance through the reduction of variation. Quality is improved by eliminating errors in production and service-related processes. Six Sigma is based on the concept of the normal distribution or curve and the belief that there is a point, six standard deviations from the mean, where there should be almost zero defects. Therefore, error rates do not exceed 3.4 defects per million opportunities. Six Sigma can be characterized as obtaining the right measures (or metrics) of quality, using rigorous statistical methods, and possessing a customer-focused and data-driven philosophy.
In 1998, Chassin concluded “We can learn a good deal from industries that are working toward the Six Sigma goal. Let’s try it in healthcare and see how close we can get.”53(p587) Over the past several years, this approach took hold in many hospitals and health systems. With cost, quality, and regulatory pressures continuing to increase within the healthcare industry, Six Sigma gained more attention from hospitals and health systems seeking a better approach to achieving
p. 154
p. 155
long-term results. This approach to improving quality can be used to address many of the challenges facing healthcare, including resource utilization, patient safety, appropriate use of technology, and increasing market share. Six Sigma efforts typically include a methodology that addresses variation and goes by the acronym “DMAIC” (define, measure, analyze, improve, and control).
A Six Sigma project can address process redesign, a problem that needs to be solved, a change that needs to be instituted, or a process that needs to be monitored. Six Sigma projects are managed by Black Belts, who oversee the project. Black Belts are members of the organization who are extensively trained in Six Sigma methods. Black Belts also must be experienced in statistical analysis and interested in teaching others. Projects normally are carried out by Yellow and Green Belts. Yellow and Green Belts are organization frontline members who are knowledgeable about Six Sigma methods but who received less training than Black Belts. For major projects an organization also assigns a senior manager or executive to act as a sponsor. Six Sigma shows success in reducing emergency room wait times, lost charges for billing in financial services, delinquent medical records, diagnostic result turnaround times, account receivable days, patients’ length of stay, and medication errors.54
Lean Enterprise
The Japanese automotive industry initiated the concept of lean manufacturing, whereby great importance is given to reducing waste and focusing on those activities that add value for the customer. Interest in applying similar principles in service industry environments, including healthcare, is continuing to grow. Lean enterprise includes five basic principles:
1.Specify value from the end customer’s perspective.
2.Identify all steps in the value stream for each service, eliminating the non-value-added steps.
3.Make the value-adding steps flow without interruption to the customer.
4.Implement a pull system based on customer demand.
5.As value is specified, value streams are identified, non-value-added steps are removed, and flow and pull are introduced, go back to the first step and continue until a state of perfection is received.55
A key focus in a lean enterprise is to eliminate waste in eight key areas: defects, overproduction, waiting, non-utilized talent, transportation, inventory, motion, and extra processing.56 An explanation of wastes found in healthcare (with examples in each category and the common strategy to address the waste) is given in TABLE 3-5. One of the major distinctions of the lean
p. 155
p. 156
approach versus traditional QI is its emphasis on investigating new ways of getting things done and making the changes in a short period. The basic idea is to identify new procedures that are designed to be more effective than existing systems, ultimately resulting in eliminating waste. QI has typically used the incremental change model, but lean enterprise is more concerned with speed and total redesign. A key element of success is the commitment and involvement of frontline workers and staff in the change process. The typical project includes cross-functional teams with training in lean principles and tools.
Table 3-5 Types of Waste in Lean Production Systems
Type of Waste
Description
Lean Strategy to Eliminate Waste
Transportation
Moving material or information
One-piece flow
Avoid batching
Inventory (overproduction)
Having more material than you need
Standard work
6S tool
Motion
Moving people to access or process material or information
Standard work
Quick changeover
Work cell
Waiting
People waiting for material or information, or material or information waiting to be processed
Quick changeover
One-piece flow
Avoid batching
Overproduction
Creating too much material or information
Standard work
One-piece flow
Avoid batching
Overprocessing
Processing more than necessary to achieve the desired output
Standard work
Mistake proofing is the use of process or design features to prevent errors or the negative impact of errors.
Defects (necessitating rework)
Errors or mistakes necessitating rework to correct the problem
Standard work
Mistake proofing
Organizations often implement lean methods before considering Six Sigma, because waste should be eliminated prior to fine-tuning the system to deliver excellence. The newer approach is a combination of both Lean and Six Sigma as there is value in reducing waste, speeding up the process, and reducing variation. Naik et al.57 applied lean principles to their emergency department, which improved overall length of stay, time of arrival to triage completion, time of arrival to being seen by a provider, and increased provider productivity. Significant improvements in workflow were realized.
Of note, the Lean philosophy encompasses the concept of True North. “True North” is a key concept in Lean process improvement that emerged from Toyota and connotes the compass needle for Lean transformation. True North works like a compass, providing a guide to take an organization from the current condition to where they want to be. It might be viewed as a purpose of the organization, and the foundation of a strategic plan. Later other approaches are explained that determine the organization’s direction and important metrics, pillars, dashboard metrics, or key success factors.
The use of Lean and Six Sigma constitute what The Joint Commission refer to as robust process improvement which supports organizations to be highly reliable.58
Performance Monitoring and Evaluation
Performance monitoring is an important component of a quality, safety, and performance management program. Areas for monitoring and evaluation are identified in accreditation standards, local, state and federal regulatory requirements, and organizational demands. Generally, these areas are high risk or problem prone. When quality or safety issues are identified, they may be subject to review or audit. General criteria to be considered for a review or audit include the following:
•Was the intervention used?
•Was it performed properly using specific criteria?
•Was it performed safely?
•Was there any adverse effect or outcome to the patient?
•Was staff competent to perform the intervention?
•Was it effective (this may include cost effectiveness)?
•Was there a better alternative to the intervention?
Areas most commonly monitored are presented and the general criteria are applied to demonstrate specific monitoring and evaluation processes. Examples are provided that may be applied in a variety of settings but may not apply to all settings based on populations served and the specific services and functions within a setting. Healthcare quality professionals work in a variety of settings and will need to determine the key functions within the setting and apply the concepts of prioritization, EBP for the setting/population, and applicable performance monitoring tools.
Not every setting and every type of monitoring process can be discussed in detail. As healthcare quality professionals determine how to apply monitoring resources, they should understand their setting. For example, the hospital setting provides care for the highest risk and most acute patients with the most intense and costly resources (e.g., severity of illness and intensity of services). Depending on the size and complexity of the services offered, this may range from acute trauma, cardiothoracic and neurosurgical care to basic surgery in a rural setting, and initiatives may focus on TCAB, bundles for preventing infections, and core measures. This setting is the costliest, but is episodic and not the primary site for most healthcare. Long-term care services may include short-term rehabilitation, long-term care, and dementia or memory care. While this setting can be costly long term, it serves a specific population. The clinical office is the primary locus of care for most persons. The physician office practice for primary care focuses on preventive measures such as the National Committee for Quality Assurance’s (NCQA) Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS), which is aimed at better health and wellness. While a specialty office practice will address unique measures associated with the specialty and address management of specific conditions such as heart failure or diabetes. While monitoring quality performance for care in each setting varies, there are common methods and all have seen increased attention with reimbursement predicated by quality measures. See Health Data Analytics for further discussion.
Medication Use
Safe medication practices, including medication use evaluation, pharmacy and therapeutics, adverse drug reactions, and adverse drug events, are reviewed in healthcare organizations. The types of medications and the setting in which they are used indicate which medications are high risk, high alert, frequently used, and most vulnerable to underuse, overuse, and misuse. Thousands of drugs are currently on the market. Many are hazardous to use but show beneficial effects for patients. The misuse of opioids is a good example of this; nearly half of all opioid deaths involve a prescription opioid.59 Organizations can identify the drugs they provide in a standard formulary
p. 156
p. 157
and identify methods to obtain non-formulary items. Then the use of non-formulary medications is monitored, usually by pharmacy staff, to determine cost-effective, safe medications for administration and ways to integrate new medications into use. High-risk medications include antibiotics, opioids, insulin, anticoagulants, and chemotherapy. High-risk populations may include infants and children, frail older adults, immunocompromised patients, critically ill patients, and transplant recipients.
The purpose of medication use monitoring is to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of medication use and the appropriate use of medication. Because of the frequent use of medications in healthcare, ongoing monitoring is needed. Priorities for monitoring are based on the numbers of patients affected (volume), the degree of risk associated with the drug’s use (risk), the degree to which the medication is known to be problem prone, and other criteria developed by the medical and professional staff. The usual steps in measuring improvement in the phases of the medication process include
1.prescribing appropriate medication;
2.preparing and dispensing medications;
3.administering medications; and
4.monitoring the effects of medications on patients.
Perhaps a more recent focus in measuring improvement is on the reconciliation of medications prescribed and taken by the patient. “Medication reconciliation is the process of creating the most accurate list possible of all medications a patient is taking—including drug name, dosage, frequency, and route—and comparing that list against the physician’s admission, transfer, and/or discharge orders, with the goal of providing correct medications to the patient at all transition points within the hospital.”60(p2)
Trends and patterns of usage can be presented in several different ways, which may include a description of use in the four steps just listed. Trends can be described in terms of specific medication types, such as antibiotic usage, and compared with antibiograms for specific organisms. Patterns also can be presented relative to overuse, underuse, and misuse. TABLE 3-6 uses the basic monitoring criteria to illustrate medication monitoring of a specific case that can be used to aggregate the data into trends.
Table 3-6 Medication Use Monitoring
General Criteria
Specific Criteria
Was the intervention used?
What class or type of medication is being monitored (e.g., antibiotic, opioid, insulin, anticoagulant, psychotropic)?
Was it performed properly according to specific criteria?
Was the medication administered in accordance with policy, criteria, or current evidence (e.g., was the proper antibiotic preoperatively administered and within 1 hour)?
Was it performed safely?
Was the medication administered safely (e.g., should the medication be administered by an infusion device to control the rate, should it be administered in a central vs. peripheral site, was it diluted properly)?
Was there any adverse effect or outcome to the patient?
Were there any adverse effects to patients (e.g., medication reactions or complications, allergies, errors, interactions with other medications or foods)?
Was staff competent to perform the intervention?
Was the staff who administered the medication competent in the procedure (e.g., does the route of administration require special knowledge and skill, does the type of medication require a certain setting for observation, is there a specific staff competency)?
Was it effective?
Did the medication achieve the desired result or an untoward result?
Was there a better alternative to the intervention?
Were there clearly documented indications for use of the medication? If the medication is high risk, high alert, or non-formulary, was there documentation on usage?
It has been acknowledged in recent years that antibiotics have been overused and overprescribed. Various professional and government organizations have developed strategies to reduce the inappropriate use of antibiotics. Most recently, a partnership of the NQF, National Quality Partners, and the Antibiotic Stewardship Action Team published a National Quality Partners Playbook: Antibiotic Stewardship in Acute Care.61(p5) It was written to support the call by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in 2014 to meet the urgent need of improving antibiotic use in hospitals. The core elements of an Antibiotic Stewardship Program include the following:
1.Leadership commitment. Dedicate necessary human, financial, and IT resources.
p. 157
p. 158
2.Accountability. Appoint a single leader responsible for program outcomes who is accountable to an executive-level or patient quality-focused hospital committee.
3.Drug expertise. Appoint a single pharmacist leader responsible for working to improve antibiotic use.
4.Action. Implement at least one recommended action.
5.Tracking. Monitor process measures, impact on patients, antibiotic use, and resistance.
6.Reporting. Report information regularly to doctors, nurses and relevant staff.
7.Education. Educate clinicians about disease state management, resistance, and optimal prescribing.
Blood and Blood Product Use
The administration of blood and blood products is a high-risk aspect of care. Healthcare staff must consider the risk and the therapeutic benefit, including the risk of blood-borne pathogens, transfusion reactions, and transfusion errors. It is also a high-cost item. The key elements to be monitored include ordering, distribution (availability and timeliness of administration), handling and dispensing, administration, and monitoring of the effects on patients. Individual cases are reviewed (TABLE 3-7), and then an evaluation of blood usage practices for providers and the organization can be performed. An evaluation might include blood that is administered when not indicated, not administered when indicated, or administered incorrectly. Specific standards from the College of American Pathologists and the American Association of Blood Banks may be useful for evaluating transfusion services.
Table 3-7 Blood and Blood Product Usage Monitoring
General Criteria
Specific Criteria
Was the intervention used?
Was blood or blood components administered?
Was it performed properly according to specific criteria?
Was the order for the blood products clear and documented in the medical record?
Was blood administration performed using defined policy including vital signs before, during, and after administration?
Were proper tubing, filters, and administration devices used?
Was it performed safely?
Was the patient monitored during the administration?
Was the rate of administration in accordance with policy, orders, and the patient’s condition?
Was there any adverse effect or outcome to the patient?
Were there any adverse reactions to the administration (immediate or delayed)? If there was a reaction, was the response in accordance with policy?
Was staff competent to perform the intervention?
Were the staff who administered the blood products competent in the procedure (is there a specific competency)?
Was it effective?
Was the most appropriate blood product administered for the patient’s condition?
Was there a better alternative to the intervention?
Was there a review of lab results, vital signs, and other results before the order to determine whether the particular blood product was indicated (e.g., iron, watchful waiting)?
Was there a review of any special considerations before administration, such as religious beliefs?
Was there proper consent and education done?
Was informed consent provided prior to administration? If not were there special exceptions such as trauma or other emergency conditions? Was the patient educated on the process including discharge instructions in the event of delayed reaction?
Restraints
Restraint use is another high-risk procedure that may be used in certain populations. It is no longer allowed in the long-term care setting but may be used in acute hospitals for medical-surgical populations, for inpatient behavioral health populations, and in the emergency department for highly unpredictable patients and situations. Some national and state organizations are calling for the eradication of restraint use in behavioral health settings altogether because of high-profile adverse events related to their use, and the organization’s adoption of trauma-informed principles and practices. Recently developed core measures in inpatient behavioral health include metrics for restraint and seclusion use (The Joint Commission’s Hospital-Based Inpatient Psychiatric Services [HBIPS]).
The CMS established specific rules related to restraint usage, and these were adopted by The Joint Commission,
p. 158
p. 159
which has deemed status with CMS. Deemed status refers to the following:
In order for a health care organization to participate in and receive federal payment from Medicare or Medicaid programs, one of the requirements is that a health care organization meet the government requirements for program participation, including a certification of compliance with the health and safety requirements called Conditions of Participation (CoPs) or Conditions for Coverage (CfCs), which are set forth in federal regulations. The certification is achieved based on either a survey conducted by a state agency on behalf of the federal government, such as the CMS, or by a national accrediting organization, such as The Joint Commission, that has been approved by CMS as having standards and a survey process that meets or exceeds Medicare’s requirements. Health care organizations that achieve accreditation through a Joint Commission “deemed status” survey are determined to meet or exceed Medicare and Medicaid requirements.62(p1)
The monitoring of this process includes each episode of restraint application (TABLE 3-8). When restraints are used, a checklist is employed to ensure that all required components are met and each episode can be easily monitored using criteria. An aggregate utilization summary allows the organization to determine any trends. Such trends may reveal patterns associated with
•time of day or day of week in which restraint use may be higher, such as nights or weekends;
•units in which restraint use may be higher, such as geropsychiatric units or units with higher numbers of patients with tubes and other devices; and
•providers whose ordering practices reveal higher restraint use.
Table 3-8 Restraint Use Monitoring
General Criteria
Specific Criteria
Was the intervention used?
Were restraints applied to the patient (what type of restraint and what limb or body part was restrained)?
What was the reason for the restraint and was it documented?
Was it performed properly according to specific criteria?
Were restraints applied properly in accordance with policy, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) regulations, and Joint Commission standards?
Was there compliance with requirements for orders, timeliness, trial releases, alternatives, initial face-to-face assessment, and ongoing monitoring?
Was it performed safely?
Were restraints applied safely so that the patient was not at risk for injury or harm?
Was there any adverse effect or outcome to the patient?
Were there any adverse effects (e.g., physical, emotional) to the patient related to the application of restraints?
Was staff competent to perform the intervention?
Were the staff who applied the restraints competent in the procedure (is there a specific competency)?
Was it effective?
Did the use of the restraints achieve the desired result?
Was there a better alternative to the intervention?
Were other alternatives tried before restraints applied (and documented)?
Was seclusion used with restraints?
Operative and Invasive Procedures
Operative, invasive, and noninvasive procedures are important diagnostic and therapeutic interventions. They often pose risk to patients and must be monitored systematically (TABLE 3-9). Aspects to be considered for monitoring include
•selection of the appropriate procedures;
•patient preparation for procedures;
•performance of the procedure and patient monitoring;
•post-procedure care;
•pre-procedure and post-procedure patient education;
•pre-procedure and post-procedure diagnostic discrepancies;
•moderate sedation monitoring; and
•complications or adverse events related to the procedure.
Table 3-9 Operative and Invasive Procedure Monitoring
General Criteria
Specific Criteria
Was the intervention used?
What was the surgical or invasive procedure performed?
Was it performed properly according to specific criteria?
Were there documented indications for the procedure?
Was the patient properly informed of risks, benefits, and alternatives and provided consent?
Was it performed safely?
Was the procedure performed using policy, guidelines, or other criteria?
Was there any adverse effect or outcome to the patient?
Was there any adverse effect on the patient before, during, or after the procedure?
Was any action taken to prevent, mitigate, or respond to an adverse event (e.g., pre-procedure positioning to prevent injury, post-procedure X-ray if a retained object was suspected)?
Was staff competent to perform the intervention?
Were staff performing the procedure competent?
Were providers privileged to perform the procedure?
Was it effective?
What was the result or outcome for the patient?
Was there a better alternative to the intervention?
Was the procedure elective, urgent, or emergent?
Were all possible options considered and discussed with the patient?
Were specialists consulted if needed?
Was the procedure performed in the right setting (e.g., inpatient or outpatient, or in a specialty hospital, or a hospital that performs a high volume of procedures vs. a hospital that infrequently performs a procedure, especially one of high risk and complexity)?
Procedures always carry the risk of complications even when performed properly. Risk is greater with procedures performed when not indicated, not performed when indicated, and performed poorly or incorrectly. Outcomes are influenced by clinical performance of all pre-procedure processes; clinical performance of the procedure; and patient monitoring before, during, and after the procedure.
p. 159
p. 160
Common errors in the operating room (OR) reported as sentinel events to The Joint Commission include
•wrong patient, wrong site, or wrong procedure;
•unintended retention of foreign objects; and
•operative/postoperative complications.6
Kim et al.58 also identified quality issues in surgery as
•breakdown in communication within and among the surgical team, care providers, patients and their families;
•delay in diagnosis or failure to diagnose; and
•delay in treatment or failure to treat.
Several national databases allow comparisons of organizational data with risk-adjusted surgical cases for observed-to-expected ratios of morbidity and mortality. This allows the organization to use an external comparison or benchmark to assess its rate of complications as a trigger or threshold for action (e.g., National Surgical Quality Improvement Program; Chevron Supplier Quality Improvement Process, Society of Thoracic Surgeons National Database).
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) monitoring and the outcomes are important to include in any QI program (TABLE 3-10). Cardiopulmonary resuscitation is defined as the application of chest compressions, defibrillation, and artificial respirations or rescue breathing. One consideration in CPR monitoring is whether the patient exhibited any signs or symptoms that could have been identified for early intervention before a full arrest occurred. If CPR must be performed, there are specific guidelines on chest compressions, airway maintenance and breathing, defibrillation, and medications (i.e., American Heart Association). Advanced care and treatment depend on the setting and patient’s underlying condition. A national registry (Get With the Guidelines® Patient Management Tool) for data on CPR events collects detailed information on exact interventions, times, and results (including electrocardiograms). The use of a registry allows comparison of data on process and outcome measures.
Table 3-10 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) Monitoring
General Criteria
Specific Criteria
Was the intervention used?
Was CPR performed (defined by defibrillation and chest compressions or similar definition)?
Was it performed properly according to specific criteria?
Was CPR performed correctly and promptly in accordance with basic life support or advanced cardiac life support guidelines including timeliness?
Was it performed safely?
Was CPR performed safely (e.g., consider the location of the victim, defibrillation, and other safety factors)?
Was there any adverse effect or outcome to the patient?
What was the outcome (immediate, defined intervals, at discharge)?
Was staff competent to perform the intervention?
Were staff trained and certified in the proper level of response? Was certification current?
Was it effective?
Were compressions and rescue breathing effective in sustaining perfusion?
Was there a better alternative to the intervention?
Were there early warning signs for rapid response team (RRT) to intervene before full arrest? RRT may be monitored separately for outcomes.
Morbidity and Mortality
Review of morbidity and mortality is often based on specific criteria. For mortality, a review of expected or unexpected mortality (observed vs. expected) is performed by condition, within specific time frames (e.g., immediately in the OR, in the hospital setting, or within 30 days after discharge), and based on inclusion and exclusion criteria. For example, patients are usually excluded from review who are expected to die based on a terminal condition with a Do Not Resuscitate/Do Not Intubate/Allow Natural Death orders, who are in hospice, or who have an end-stage condition. Other mortalities are
p. 160
p. 161
then reviewed as outcomes that can provide information about the quality of care provided. Similarly, complications are also reviewed, and the criteria for cases and conditions to be reviewed are established by the medical and professional staff. Individual cases are then identified and reviewed, and aggregated reports are trended to identify opportunities for improvement. Comparisons of trends can be made internally over time or externally compared with national databases.
Morbidity and mortality data are often risk adjusted to compare similar patients (usually with similar conditions, procedures, or diagnosis-related group [DRGs]). National databases allow comparison of morbidity and mortality using a risk-adjusted model (e.g., all Patient Refined DRGs). Typical occurrence screening examples for mortality include
•death within 24 hours of admission to a hospital;
•death within 72 hours of transfer out of special care unit;
•lack of documentation of deterioration during 48 hours preceding death;
•failure of physician to respond to notification of change in patient’s condition during 48 hours preceding death;
•lack of documentation indicating death was expected;
•lack of concordance between premortem and postmortem diagnosis;
•clinically significant incident or occurrence within 72 hours of death;
•clinically significant complication of surgical procedure within 72 hours of death;
•clinically significant complication of invasive procedure within 72 hours of death;
•death during surgery;
•unplanned organ removal during operative procedure within 2 months preceding death;
•surgical procedure to repair a perforation, laceration, or other injury of an organ during an invasive procedure within 2 months preceding death;
•repeat of any surgical procedure within 2 months preceding death;
•myocardial infarction within 24 hours of a surgical or invasive procedure;
•death within 48 hours of elective surgical procedure;
•lack of concordance between preoperative and postoperative diagnosis; and
•was the death preventable?
Infection Prevention, Surveillance, and Control
The goal of the infection prevention and control (IPC) program is to identify and reduce the risks of acquiring and transmitting endemic and epidemic infections among patients, employees, physicians, other IPC professionals, contractors, volunteers, students, and visitors. This includes both direct patient care and support staff. The three major aspects of the IPC program are surveillance, prevention, and control. The usual responsibilities of the IPC program include
•definitions of healthcare-associated infections (HAIs);
•definitions of data elements;
•rationale for surveillance method selected;
•description of patient population studied;
•data collection methods;
p. 161
p. 162
•quality control procedures for data validation;
•responsibility;
•systems for reporting and follow-up;
•reporting to public health authorities; and
•documentation of employee infections of epidemiologic significance.
The prevention and control methods used in IPC include
•policies and procedures to protect and prevent infections;
•defined barrier precautions;
•orientation and ongoing education of staff;
•reporting to public health officials;
•methods for screening and documentation of epidemiologically significant infections;
•systems for required waste identification;
•use of personal protective equipment and supplies:
⚬patient care supplies and equipment (e.g., sterile and nonsterile supplies, hand hygiene facilities),
⚬protective apparel, and
⚬engineering controls;
•precautions used to reduce the risk of infection:
⚬surveillance, and
⚬assessment and analysis of infection rates;
•decontamination, high-level disinfection, and sterilization:
⚬reusable medical equipment,
⚬policies and procedures, and
⚬processes identified:
▪principles of asepsis;
▪disinfection, sterilization;
▪sanitation of rooms, equipment;
▪selection, use, and cleaning of personal protective equipment; and
▪traffic control.
The IPC program is based on a risk assessment of the organization. This assessment includes factors such as
•geographic location of the organization;
•populations within the region or organization and level of risk (e.g., neonates, infants, and children, and patients in various intensive care units [ICUs]);
•volume of patients served and volume of conditions (e.g., number of patients with positive human immunodeficiency virus, tuberculosis, and colonized with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [MRSA]);
•clinical focus of programs (e.g., types of surgeries and invasive procedures, immunocompromised patients such as patients on chemotherapy, transplant patients);
•number of employees (often encompasses employee occupational health services); and
•scope of services provided (e.g., acute, ambulatory, long-term, and home care).
After the risk assessment is completed, priorities are identified and strategies to prevent or mitigate problems are determined. In many healthcare settings, the prevention of HAIs in high-risk units (ICU, neonatal and pediatric ICU, transplant units, dialysis units, and surgical units) is a key responsibility. These HAIs must be monitored and analyzed to determine trends and ways to reduce their occurrence. The types of surveillance for IPC programs include total house, priority directed, targeted, problem oriented, and outbreak response.
The most important factor in monitoring prevention of HAIs is proper hand hygiene. The monitoring of hand hygiene using either CDC or World Health Organization criteria is a requirement of The Joint Commission and a National Patient Safety Goal. Specific monitoring is performed for surgical-site infections and for device-related infections including ventilator-associated pneumonia, CLABSI, and catheter-associated urinary tract infection.
Another key role is to identify communicable diseases, control outbreaks when identified in patients, and report specific results to the public health department. One preventive measure for controlling certain outbreaks is immunization programs conducted in collaboration with occupational health staff. These might include vaccination for hepatitis B, influenza, pneumonia, and other viral diseases. The infection preventionist is also responsible for monitoring epidemiologically important and multidrug-resistant organisms such as MRSA, Clostridium difficile, and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus.
Tools are being developed for collecting data to monitor these high-risk areas for causing adverse events or harm to patients. As conditions or areas of concern for quality and patient safety are identified, healthcare quality professionals need to stay informed of new knowledge, trends, and tools to address infection risk to patients. The models described for specific conditions can be utilized to address key questions about interventions and measures specific to the condition.
Medical Records/Electronic Health Records
The monitoring of the medical record/electronic health record usually includes elements in several categories:
•Required documentation content: The requirements vary by setting, procedure, and even profession. For example, the requirements for a treatment plan/individualized plan of care is different for an acute care hospital and a long-term care facility. The requirements for surgery with general anesthesia are different from those for an outpatient procedure with moderate sedation. Each facility must first identify the required content for the record and then develop a process to monitor important elements. Checklists, databases, or other tools make this process more efficient. This step often reflects the presence or absence of the required content.
•Timeliness of documentation: The next requirement is the time requirement of specific documentation. Most common elements monitored for timeliness include history and physical, preoperative and postoperative notes,
p. 162
p. 163
and discharge summaries. This step reflects whether the documentation met or did not meet the required timeline.
•Appropriateness of documentation (clinical pertinence): The monitoring of clinical pertinence requires an assessment of the documentation in terms of the patient’s condition, diagnostic results, intervention procedures, vital signs, and other information. This review may determine that documentation was appropriate or not appropriate to the standard of care, key elements of the assessment, treatment plan, interventions, and medication management.
Medical Peer Review
Peer review is an evaluation of an episode of care conducted to improve the quality of patient care or the use of healthcare resources. It is a process protected by statute in most states, although this varies, and by federal statute for federal healthcare facilities. While the protection by statute may vary, the confidentiality of the reviewer and those under review is critical to ensuring the integrity of the process. Healthcare quality professionals often coordinate and facilitate the medical review process on behalf of the medical and professional staff and are responsible for maintaining confidentiality throughout the process.
The first step is to identify an appropriate peer for the specific review. A peer is generally defined as a healthcare professional with comparable education, training, experience, licensure, or similar clinical privileges or scope of practice. The peer review process includes a criteria-based case review. The medical and professional staff establish the criteria. These reviews may include an assessment of the degree to which a standard was met or if providers in the same situation would act in the same manner. These ratings may be noted as a score or level number for tracking purposes or as a trigger for Focused Professional Practice Evaluation when continued quality concerns are identified. Results may be trended by individual provider performance or by organization system. Usually, a peer review committee manages the review and reporting function as a subcommittee of the medical executive committee. Participation in peer review is one way medical staff members are involved in measuring, assessing, and improving performance of licensed practitioners.
Medical staff identify criteria or circumstances that initiate a peer review, set time frames for the review to occur, identify reviewers, and provide mechanisms for participation by the person whose performance is being reviewed. Both outcomes and processes are measured. An effective peer review process includes these elements:
•Consistency: Peer review is conducted using defined procedures.
•Defensibility: Conclusions reached through the process are supported by a rationale.
•Balance: Minority opinions and views of the person being reviewed are considered and recorded.
•Peer review activities are considered in the reappointment process.
•Conclusions from peer review are tracked over time.
•Actions based on conclusions are monitored for effectiveness.
•Findings, conclusions, recommendations, and actions are communicated to appropriate entities.
•Recommendations to improve performance are implemented.
Physician leaders have a role in improving clinical processes used for clinical privileging. Practitioner profiles are extremely important to maintain and are used to evaluate performance and maintain privileges. Some key aspects of these files include the following:
•Profiles are based on performance.
•Profiles are provided to each physician or provider on a regular basis.
•Organizations may use risk-adjusted software.
•EBP determines metrics used.
•Data are timely and accurate.
•Profiles are process focused.
•Physician data are grouped by specialty type or specific diagnoses.
•Data are reported regularly.
•Physician champions talk directly with medical staff about their data.
The physician data must be meaningful to physicians. Data represent major service lines and patient safety issues and include inpatient as well as outpatient data. When available, national targets and benchmarks are used to compare performance. For example, national rates of complications of certain procedures when compared with a specific physician or service can help the organization identify performance concerns about what is expected for the same procedure. Data are easily accessed and shared with the physician to improve performance; the profiles vary by the physician’s specialty or area of practice. Some examples of elements that might be found in a physician profile or the Ongoing Professional Practice Evaluation (OPPE). These might include patient volume, length of stay, conformity with system wide initiatives (e.g., use of deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism prophylaxis), legibility of records and use of unapproved abbreviations, and severity-adjusted morbidity or mortality rates. The profile or OPPE is structured according to the current core competencies of the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education Patient Care, Medical Knowledge, Practice-Based Learning and Improvement, Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Professionalism, and Systems-Based Practice.65
Finally, profiles are confidential and there must be a mechanism to track activity when they are viewed. Policies and procedures are needed to establish the system for document management. This might include a log or sign-out sheet (e.g., date of request, reason for request, name of
p. 163
p. 164
person reviewing, and pertinent notes). See Health Data Analytics for discussion of privacy and security of protected health information.
Performance Improvement Tools
Described next are methods and tools for decision-making and process improvement. Detailed descriptions and examples of these tools follow. More information on data analysis and SPC are described in Health Data Analytics.
Affinity Diagram
The affinity diagram (FIG. 3-12) organizes numerous ideas or issues into groupings based on their natural relationships within the groupings. These diagrams typically are used to analyze or chart a process and to structure and organize issues to provide a new perspective.
How to construct
1.Define the issue.
2.Brainstorm and record ideas on cards.
3.Randomly display the cards on a board.
4.Have the group silently sort the issues into groups.
5.Create header cards for groupings.
6.Draw a diagram based on the groupings (it will look like an organizational chart).
When to use
•To analyze or chart a process
•To structure and organize issues to provide a new perspective
Figure 3-12 Affinity diagram.
Brainstorming
Brainstorming (FIG. 3-13) is a free-flowing generation of ideas. This approach can generate excitement, equalize involvement, and result in original solutions to the problem. There is no censoring or discussion of ideas as they are generated, but the team can build upon the ideas of others. It is very important that no judgments are made concerning the idea’s worth to the process, or whether the idea is even feasible (money is no object in a brainstorming exercise). Discussion of ideas comes at a later point in the process. This technique works well to generate ideas related to cause and effect or identifying paths toward a goal.
How to construct
1.Define the brainstorming topic.
2.Inform participants of the ground rules that (a) “all ideas are good ideas” and (b) “all comments/evaluation should be held in abeyance until the brainstorming is complete.”
3.Give everyone a few minutes to think about the topic and write down their ideas.
4.Have the team members call out their ideas. This can be free-flowing, or a structure can be used, such as going around the table with each person verbalizing one idea each time around.
5.As the ideas are generated, one person should write the ideas on a flip chart.
When to use
•Use when a list of possible ideas is needed
•This technique works well to generate ideas for such tools as the cause-and-effect diagram and the tree diagram
Figure 3-13 Brainstorming.
Cause-and-Effect, Ishikawa, or Fishbone Diagram
The Cause-and-Effect, Ishikawa, or Fishbone Diagram (FIG. 3-14) is used to display, explore and analyze all the potential causes related to a problem or condition and to discover the root causes of variation.
How to construct
1.Determine the effect or the label for the diagram and put it on the far-right side of the diagram.
2.Draw a horizontal line to the left of the effect.
3.Determine the categories (most common categories include the four Ms [Method, Manpower, Material, Machinery] or the five Ps [Process/Procedure, People, Policy, Plant, Price] but these are not the only categories that can be used).
4.Draw a diagonal line for half of the categories above the line and half below the line.
5.Brainstorm the list for each of the categories.
6.Organize each of the causes on each bone (subcategories).
7.Draw branch bones to show the relationships.
When to use
•To identify and organize possible causes of problems
•To identify factors that will lead to success
•As part of a root cause analysis
Figure 3-14 Cause-and-effect, Ishikawa, or fishbone diagram.
p. 164
p. 165
p. 165
p. 166
Checklist
A checklist (FIG. 3-15) is a standard way to ensure completion of critical tasks for a process or activity. The checklist ensures accuracy, accountability, completeness, and efficiency. Some ways to organize a checklist include the following:
How to construct
1.Identify critical elements or tasks to be completed for a process.
2.Make a list of all elements with a space to indicate completion of the task before moving to the next item.
When to use
•When reliance on memory is not sufficient
•When tasks for a process or activity are critical and omission may cause harm
Figure 3-15 Checklist.
•Ordered List: a list of tasks needed to be accomplished in a particular order. The checklist is numbered, starting at the first task or step, and proceeding to the last task or step, in increasing numerical order. The ordered list ensures correct and complete processing.
•Itemized List: a list of items to be addressed, with meaningful information alongside; used as a guide or reference. An itemized list provides a complete accounting or reporting of the information present.
•Sub-List: a sub-list is a branch or subset of an ordered list. Sub-lists can exist for almost any of the above types of lists.
•Prioritized List: any of the above lists placed into an order based on a priority scheme. It helps use time effectively, focus energy where it’s most needed, and address the important items or tasks first.
•General List: any of the above lists with a space for a check mark, initials, or additional information. As tasks or items are completed, the line is checked or initialed.66
Deployment Chart or Planning Grid
A deployment chart (FIG. 3-16) is used to project schedules for complex tasks and their associated subtasks. It usually is used with a task for which the time for completion is known. The tool also is used to determine who has responsibility for the parts of a plan or project. This tool also is called a planning grid. The grid helps the group organize key steps in the project to reach milestones and the desired goal. Shaded boxes may be used to indicate the people who primarily are responsible, with ovals indicating an assistant or advisor.
How to construct
1.Specify the desired outcome.
2.Identify the final step necessary (e.g., a report to a committee with the team’s recommendations).
3.Identify the starting point.
4.Brainstorm a list of the necessary steps between the starting and final steps.
5.Refine the list by combining like steps and defining the sequence steps.
6.Design a grid with important items (e.g., who is responsible, due date, budget/cost) listed across the top.
7.Arrange the list of tasks or steps in sequence down the left column.
8.Fill in the appropriate columns, including tentative dates.
9.Revise the planning grid as necessary.
When to use
•Use as a planning tool to identify steps to be taken, timelines, and responsibility for those steps
•Use for project and management teams to determine what needs to be done, in what sequence, who is responsible for what, and how that relates to others
Figure 3-16 Deployment chart or planning grid.
Delphi Method
The Delphi method is a combination of the brainstorming, multivoting, and nominal group techniques. This technique is used when group members are not in one location and often is conducted by e-mail when a meeting is not feasible. After each step in the process, the data are sent to one person, who compiles the data and sends out the next round for participants to complete.
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) is a preventive approach to identify failures and opportunities for error and can be used for processes as well as equipment. The traditional techniques for FMEA originated in manufacturing and other industries and were adapted to healthcare. The Veterans Affairs National Center for Patient Safety created the Healthcare FMEATM (HFMEA). There are six main steps to HFMEA, as displayed in FIGURE 3-17.
How to construct
There are six main steps to HFMEASM
1.Define a topic and process to be studied.
2.Convene an interdisciplinary team with content and process experts.
3.Develop a flow diagram of the process with consecutive numbering of each step and lettering of all subprocesses.
4.List all possible failure modes of each subprocess, including the severity and probability of the failure mode, and then number these failure modes (brainstorming may be helpful to identify failure modes).
5.After analyzing the failure modes, determine the action for each failure mode to eliminate, control, or accept.
6.Identify the corresponding outcome measure to test the redesigned process.
Figure 3-17 Healthcare failure mode and effects analysis.
Flow Chart or Process Flow Chart
The flow chart or process flow chart (FIG. 3-18) is a graphical display of a process as it is known to its authors, owners, or team. The flow chart outlines the sequence and relationship of the pieces of the process. Through management of data and information, the team comes to a common understanding and knowledge concerning the process. Information is discussed about the structure (who carries out the specific step in the identified process), the activity that is occurring, and the outcome or the results.
How to construct
1.Define the process that will be represented in the flowchart.
2.Determine all individuals, departments and groups involved in the process.
3.Brainstorm the steps in the process.
4.Construct the flowchart graphically using rows or columns corresponding to the associated work units.
5.Arrange the steps sequentially.
6.Draw arrows between the steps to show the process flow.
7.Review the flowchart and validate its accuracy with other individuals who are involved in the process.
When to use
•To show steps in a process
•To find one or multiple sources of a problem or identify potential areas for improvement
•To examine the handoffs that occur in a process
•To identify personnel, groups, or entire departments that are responsible for processes or tasks
•To demonstrate current processes (current state)
Figure 3-18 Flowchart or process flowchart. (From AHRQ. Workflow Assessment for Health IT: flowchart. https://healthit.ahrq.gov/health-it-tools-and-resources/workflow-assessment-health-it-toolkit/all-workflow-tools/flowchart.)
Interrelationship Diagram
This tool organizes numerous complex problems, issues, or ideas by sorting and displaying their interrelations. The interrelationship diagram (FIG. 3-19) requires multidirectional thinking when there is not a straight-line cause-and-effect relationship. It is useful to address both operational and organizational issues.
How to construct
1.Determine the issue/problem.
2.Generate ideas through brainstorming and other methods regarding the steps in the processes or issues.
3.Write the steps on cards and arrange them in similar groups (as with the affinity diagram) in cause-and-effect sequence. This technique is most effective when dealing with 15–50 items that may be interrelated. Discussion is appropriate throughout this process to ensure that no steps are missed.
4.Allow at least ½-inch of space between the cards so that relationship arrows can be drawn.
5.Fill in the relationship arrows that indicate what leads to what. This is done one card at a time until all cards have been discussed and relationship arrows drawn. Each card should be examined in terms of what happens when this card (process step) occurs; two-way arrows should be avoided.
6.Review and revise the diagram, transfer the information to a sheet of paper, and distribute it to team members for their review and revision before the next meeting.
7.Identify cards with the most arrows leading to them and cards with the most arrows leading away from them. Cards with incoming arrows represent a secondary issue or bottleneck in a process. Cards with outgoing arrows indicate a basic cause/issue that, if solved or overcome, will affect many other items. Cards with the most arrows are key factors in the process and should be addressed first.
When to use
•When the correct sequencing of events is critical
•When the issue/problem is complex and contains interrelationships among and between ideas/steps
Figure 3-19 Interrelationship diagram.
Matrix Diagram
This tool displays the connection between each idea or issue in one group to one or more groups. A matrix diagram (FIG. 3-20)
p. 166
p. 167
p. 167
p. 168
can show the relationship between two items as well as the strength of the relationship. Many matrix diagram formats are available, but the L-shaped matrix is the most common. Other common formats include the T-shaped, Y-shaped, X-shaped, and C-shaped matrices.
Figure 3-20 Matrix diagram.
Multivoting
Multivoting (FIG. 3-21) is an easy, quick method for determining the most popular or important items from a list. The method uses a series of votes to cut the list in half each time, thus reducing the number of items to be considered.
How to construct
1.Generate a list of items and number them.
2.If the group agrees, combine items that seem to be similar.
3.If necessary, renumber all items.
4.Each member lists on a sheet of paper the items he or she considers the most important (the number of items chosen should be at least one-third of the total number of items on the list).
5.Tally the votes beside each item on the list.
6.Eliminate items with the lowest scores.
7.Repeat the above process until the list is narrowed down to an appropriate number for the group to focus on or the item with the top priority is identified.
When to use
Use after a brainstorming session to identify the key items on which the group will focus
Figure 3-21 Multivoting.
Nominal Group Technique
This is a group decision-making process for generating many ideas in which each member works by himself or herself. The nominal group technique (FIG. 3-22) is used when group members are new to each other or when they have different opinions and goals. This approach is more structured than brainstorming and multivoting.
How to construct
1.Define the task as you would for brainstorming.
2.Describe the purpose of this technique and the process to the group.
3.Write the question to be answered for all to see. Be sure to clarify the question as needed for the group.
4.Generate ideas to address the identified question by having the group write down their ideas in silence.
5.List all the items as you would in brainstorming. Only be sure to use a structured approach so that all ideas are listed (again, there is to be no discussion of the items at this time).
6.Clarify and discuss the ideas one at a time.
7.Give each member 4–8 cards or pieces of paper.
8.Members write one selection from the list on each card and assign a point value to each item. The highest value should be assigned to the most important item (i.e., if there are four cards, the most important card is numbered 4, next important 3, etc.)
9.The cards are collected, and the votes are tallied; mark each item on the list with the value on the cards for that item.
10.The item with the largest number becomes the group’s selection/priority.
When to use
•Use when team members are new to each other
•Use when dealing with a controversial topic
Figure 3-22 Nominal group technique.
Plan–Do–Study–Act
The basic PDSA model is depicted in FIGURE 3-23. Specific strategies that can be used to test and link tests of change using PDSA cycles and the IHI model52,67 include the following:
Figure 3-23 Process improvement model (Plan–Do–Study–Act). (Reprinted from Langley GL, Moen R, Nolan KM, et al. The Improvement Guide: A Practical Approach to Enhancing Organizational Performance. 2nd ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers; 2009, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)
•Plan for multiple cycles of improvement in advance to support rapid-cycle movement;
•Scale the scope and size of tests so that small tests can be done rapidly (e.g., with a few patients, with one provider, in a single day);
•Choose people who want to work on the improvement change process;
•Capitalize on existing resources, best practice, and research. Don’t reinvent the wheel;
•Select opportunities for change that are readily achievable (“low-hanging fruit” or easy, visible wins) first. Make the test feasible and practical;
•Don’t delay a project because technology is not available; for small projects, paper and pen or other simple methods may be sufficient;
•Collect useful, meaningful measures and review results of every change cycle to determine any modifications that are needed;
•Test the change under a variety of conditions (e.g., different shifts and weekends); and
•Be prepared to stop or abandon the process if no improvement is observed.
Prioritization Matrix
This tool organizes tasks, issues, or actions and prioritizes them based on agreed-upon criteria. The tool combines the tree diagram and the L-shaped matrix diagram, displaying the best possible effect. The prioritization matrix (FIG. 3-24) often is used before more complex matrices are needed. This matrix applies options under discussion to the priority considerations of the organization.
How to construct
1.Create an L-shaped matrix as previously described in the matrix section.
2.Prioritize and assign weights to the list of criteria that will be used in the prioritization.
3.Prioritize the list of options based on each criterion.
4.Prioritize and select the item(s) across all the criteria.
When to use
•When issues are identified and options must be narrowed down
•When options have strong interrelationships
•When options all need to be done, but prioritization or sequencing is needed
Figure 3-24 Prioritization matrix.
p. 168
p. 169
Process Decision Program Chart
This tool maps the identified events and contingencies that can occur between the time a problem is stated and solved. It attempts to identify potential deviations from the desired process, allowing the team to anticipate and prevent the deviation. Use the process decision program chart (FIG. 3-25) when the team is uncertain about a proposed implementation plan. This tool can be displayed in a graphic format combining a tree diagram and a flow chart or as an outline format (the outline format may be more difficult to use when communicating to a group and identifying patterns and simultaneous paths).
How to construct
1.Determine the proposed flow of a process.
2.Choose the graphic or outline format.
3.Identify the desired goal or improvement.
4.List the first steps in sequence along the first level of the tree diagram, then add a second level of steps to reach the first-level step (refer to how to construct a tree diagram for construction directions).
5.Identify the things that could go wrong at each step and list them as another level below the appropriate step.
6.Brainstorm ideas that could be implemented to prevent the undesired events and display them as clouds branched below the last level.
When to use
•As part of a root cause analysis
•To anticipate any problems before implementing an action plan
•To develop a contingency plan
•To test theories as they are implemented if unable to test a theory before implementation
Figure 3-25 Process decision program chart.
Root Cause Analysis
When variation is inherent in the process and a reduction of the variation is desired, the root cause of the variation must be identified to eliminate tampering with the effective components of the process. The Joint Commission requires a root cause analysis (RCA) in response to sentinel events (unexpected serious adverse events).
1.To start with, identify potential causes of the variation. An interdisciplinary team very familiar with the process can use brainstorming, flowcharting, cause-and-effect diagrams, or some other process to determine these potential causes.
2.The second step is to verify the potential causes by collecting data about the process. After the data are collected and analyzed using the tools discussed in this module, the actual causes of the variation (or at least the most probable causes) can be identified. The following areas are addressed in the analysis:
⚬human factors: communications and information management systems;
p. 169
p. 170
⚬human factors: training;
⚬human factors: fatigue and scheduling;
⚬environmental factors;
⚬equipment factors;
⚬rules, policies, and procedures; and
⚬leadership systems and culture.37
3.At this point, the team can develop and implement an action plan designed to eliminate or minimize the root causes of the variation.
See Patient Safety for more information on RCAs.
6S
6S (FIG. 3-26) is a lean tool. 6S is modeled after the 5S process improvement system designed to reduce waste and optimize productivity with the added pillar of safety. It is used in the workplace to (1) Create and maintain organization and orderliness; (2) Use visual cues to achieve more consistent operational results and (3) Reduce defects and making accidents less likely.68
How to construct
1.Sort (Get rid of it): Separate what is needed in the work area from what is not; eliminate the latter.
2.Set in order (Organize): Organize what remains in the work area.
3.Shine (Clean and solve): Clean and inspect the work area.
4.Safety (Respect workplace and employee): Create a safe place to work.
5.Standardize (Make consistent): Standardize cleaning, inspection, and safety practices.
6.Sustain (Keep it up): Make 6S a way of life.
When to use
•To establish orderly flow, eliminate waste, and organize the workplace
•To standardize the work setting
Figure 3-26 The six pillars of 6S.
p. 170
p. 171
p. 171
p. 172
Spaghetti Diagram
A spaghetti diagram (FIG. 3-27), also called a layout diagram, is a graphic representation of the flow of traffic or movement. It helps an organization visualize flow and figure out how to improve it by looking at how people or materials move from one location to another.69(p1)
How to construct
1.Get a layout or blueprint of the area.
2.Pick the subject to follow for the flow.
3.Record every movement until completed.
When to use
•To demonstrate flow or movement in a process
•To identify excess or wasted travel or movement
Figure 3-27 Spaghetti diagram (or layout diagram).
Supplier Input Process Output Customer
A supplier-input-process-output-customer (SIPOC, FIG. 3-28) is a tool in process management to identify key drivers of a process. When the healthcare quality professional has a clear understanding of data, types of data, and tools, the process steps may be described with a variety of acronyms (e.g., PDSA; PDCA; assess, plan, implement, evaluate) but include similar components. No specific improvement model is endorsed in this section so that the healthcare quality professional can use tools depending on the improvement question and the organizational context. Regardless of the improvement model, the improvement process seeks to accomplish the following:
S
I
P
O
C
Supplier name
Process input
Process step 1
Process output
Customer name
Supplier name
Process input
Process step 2
Process output
Customer name
Supplier name
Process input
Process step 3
Process output
Customer name
How to construct
1.Identify each element of the SIPOC and list across the top of a page.
2.Under each heading of SIPOC list the suppliers, their inputs, the process, the customers, and the outputs.
When to use
To identify internal and external customer needs in a process and to use with other lean tools for process improvement
Figure 3-28 Supplier input process output customer.
•Ensure the project is a priority for the organization and is aligned with the strategic plan.
p. 172
p. 173
•Ensure leadership support and commitment.
•Assess the priority and feasibility of initiatives based on risks, resources, leadership support, and organizational strategies.
•Clarify the aim, stated in specific measurable terms.
•Present baseline data analysis that illustrates the problem. Use tools and techniques to analyze.
•Demonstrate that the aim is based on the organization’s own data and identifies the specific problem to be solved, the program to be enhanced, or the process or system to be redesigned.
•Select an inter-professional team with content and process experts and all key disciplines as members.
•Map the “as-is” or current state process and collect data on key aspects of the process. Continue to use data and tools to identify bottlenecks, constraints, delays, and other barriers.
•Define measures and collect data. Indicate how a change results in improvement.
•Describe the change to be made.
•Implement the change (small tests of change or pilot tests).
•Study the effects of the change and decide: adopt, adapt, or abandon the specific change.
•Map the new “to-be” or future state process.
•Spread the change throughout the organization in a defined implementation plan (include communication plan and education plan).
•Sustain the improvement by monitoring.
p. 173
p. 174
p. 174
p. 175
COPIS (customer-output-process-input-supplier) is also used, which is outward in approach to begin with the customer’s viewpoint. Both SIPOC and COPIS are approaches used in Six Sigma and complement DMAIC.
Tree Diagram
This tool maps out the full range of paths and tasks in the process that must be accomplished to achieve a goal. A tree diagram (FIG. 3-29) resembles an organizational chart. The tree diagram can be presented as an organizational chart or placed on its side.
How to construct
1.Identify the overall goal that can be broken down into the steps necessary to achieve it.
2.Position the paper you are working on vertically because the diagram usually is long rather than wide; work from left to right.
3.Select the appropriate tree branches (categories/groups) to investigate (an affinity diagram often is helpful to identify the first level of detail, which always is the broadest level); create headers for each of these branches.
4.For each header, ask: What needs to happen to achieve the header and goal statement? Write ideas on cards and place them to the right of the appropriate first-level idea. This level should have a direct cause-and-effect relationship with the previous level.
5.When complete, ask the following questions to each level of detail: Will these lead to the results? Do we really need to do this task to reach the results?
When to use
•When it is crucial that a step/task not be overlooked
•When a specific task has become the focus, but it is a complicated task to complete
•When there have been numerous roadblocks to implementation
Figure 3-29 Tree diagram.
Value Stream Mapping
Value stream mapping (FIG. 3-30) is a map of the process in which only value-added steps for the customer are retained and waste removed. This Lean tool analyzes a process from a systems perspective and creates a visual depiction of the sequential steps in a process from beginning to end.
How to construct
1.Identify the current process (mark steps that are of no value to the customer or required by some regulatory body).
2.Identify the ideal process state.
When to use
To improve flow of the process, reduce waste, and implement lean functioning
Figure 3-30 Value stream mapping.
p. 175
p. 176
Voice of the Customer
Voice of the Customer (VOC) (FIG. 3-31) is a tool conducted at the start (or “Fuzzy Front End”) of any new product, process, or service design initiative to understand better the customer’s wants and needs. The VOC can serve as key input for new product definition, Quality Function Deployment, or the setting of detailed design specifications. Four aspects of the VOC are customer needs, a hierarchical structure, priorities, and customer perceptions of performance.70 The product is a list of needs, wants, and desires of the customer of a process output (e.g., specifications, requirements).
•What do you like about the current process?
•What do you think needs improvement?
•What would you recommend to improve the current process?
•What could threaten the success of the project?
How to construct
1.Identify customers of a process output.
2.Develop a list of questions to ask customers about the process and their needs.
3.Refine the list to use with the process review and improvement.
When to use
To improve a process
Figure 3-31 Voice of the customer.
Leading Change and Teamwork
Organizations use teams to work on one or more targeted improvement opportunities. Teams may report up to an established quality operational structure or to a group of individuals with responsibility for the area where the improvement opportunity exists. The composition and size of each team depend on the specific aim of the team. Including the right people on the team is critical to success. IHI71 identified three categories of team membership with impact on team success:
1.Clinical leadership representation to bring the authority necessary to test and implement the recommended change and to help overcome issues;
2.Technical expertise to ensure relevant understanding of related technical content areas; and
p. 176
p. 177
3.Day-to-day leadership to include frontline leadership and physician representation to serve as a driving force during the project and the champion for change during implementation of improvements.
In addition, each team selects a project sponsor or champion with executive authority who serves as liaison to other areas of the organization as well as to other members of senior management. The project sponsor checks in periodically on the team’s progress.
What is a team? A team is “a group of people who are interdependent with respect to information, resources, and skills and who seek to combine their efforts to achieve a common goal.”72(p2) An important structural element for healthcare quality is creating a team-based organization. Because patient care involves multiple professional disciplines, the linchpin for improvement is an employee base with regular communication and contact that allows them to coordinate and problem solve to continuously improve quality of care. The organization must develop an infrastructure within which the cycle of improvement can operate. One feature of this infrastructure is teams.
Teamwork in healthcare is “a dynamic process involving two or more health professionals with complimentary backgrounds and skills, sharing common health goals and exercising concerted physical and mental effort in assessing, planning, or evaluating patient care. This is accomplished through interdependent collaboration, open communication and shared decision-making. This in turn generates value-added patient, organizational and staff outcomes.”73(p238) Nancarrow et al.74 identified 10 competencies of effective inter-professional teams:
1.Identifies a leader who establishes a clear direction and vision for the team, while listening and providing support and supervision to the team members.
2.Incorporates a set of values that clearly provide direction for the team’s service provision; these values should be visible and consistently portrayed.
3.Demonstrates a team culture and interdisciplinary atmosphere of trust where contributions are valued and consensus is fostered.
4.Ensures appropriate processes and infrastructures are in place to uphold the vision of the service (e.g., referral criteria, communications infrastructure).
5.Provides quality patient-focused services with documented outcomes; utilizes feedback to improve the quality of care.
6.Utilizes communication strategies that promote intra-team communication, collaborative decision-making and effective team processes.
7.Provides sufficient team staffing to integrate an appropriate mix of skills, competencies, and personalities to meet the needs of patients and enhance smooth functioning.
8.Facilitates recruitment of staff who demonstrate interdisciplinary competencies including team functioning, collaborative leadership, communication, and sufficient professional knowledge and experience.
9.Promotes role interdependence while respecting individual roles and autonomy.
10.Facilitates personal development through appropriate training, rewards, recognition, and opportunities for career development.74(pp5–11)
Types of Teams
High-functioning teams improve clinical and financial outcomes. The roles that team members assume in the provision of patient care vary depending on philosophical, political, social, communication, and clinical differences about patient care.75 Inarguably, teams are of great importance. And there are many types of formal and informal teams.
•Temporary project: Teams with a special focus on improvement, problem solving, or product development. There are often both core and resource members. Core members participate throughout the project and have complementary skills needed for the desired work output. Resource members may be critical only for specific phases of the project and may move in and out of the team. Other ongoing or functional work teams are usually permanent or may be longstanding.
•Natural work: These teams involve the people in each work setting who share responsibility for a process, workflow, or type of work. Members are those who work together each day to complete the task. These teams can be cross-functional, as with an OR team, or intact, such as a team of nurses in a unit. Autonomy varies, but there typically is a leader. These teams can be temporary (e.g., brought together to solve a single problem) or permanent (e.g., continuous improvement teams).
•Self-directed: This work team is a type of natural work team that shares many management responsibilities, such as scheduling work, managing budgets, evaluating performance, and hiring new team members.
•Process management: Team focuses on sharing responsibility for monitoring and controlling a work process, such as new product development. Members may rotate on and off the team based on their contributions (expertise).
•Virtual teams: Team typically uses technology-supported communications rather than face-to-face interactions to accomplish their tasks. They may cross boundaries, such as time zones, geography, and organizational units. Virtual teams can be either project teams or ongoing teams.
p. 177
p. 178
Steering Committees
Steering committees (often known as quality councils) are permanent QI teams consisting of cross-functional members, and in patient-centered care environments, include patients and family members. These committees are self-managed teams that provide direction and focus by identifying and prioritizing improvement opportunities in the organization. The role of the steering committee or quality council is to sustain, facilitate, and expand the performance and process improvement initiatives based on the strategic plan. It is comprised of top leaders in the organization, including medical staff. The main responsibilities of the quality council include
•lending legitimacy to the quality efforts;
•maintaining organization focus on the identified goals and priorities;
•fostering teamwork for improvement;
•providing necessary resources (e.g., human, financial); and
•formulating organizational policies regarding quality and safety priorities, participation, annual self-assessments, and reward and recognition systems.
When to Use Teams
Three aspects of the required task are examined before deciding whether to use a team: task complexity, task interdependence, and task objectives.76 Tasks are complex when they involve large amounts of information, they are performed under conditions of high uncertainty, they contain many subtasks that require people with specialized skills and knowledge, and there are no standardized procedures for completing the tasks. Teams are important because they bring larger numbers of specialized individuals (i.e., subject matter experts) to carry the burden and offer greater diverse inputs that are more likely to result in more alternatives generated and more creative solutions. Creativity is particularly important when there are no standardized procedures and the environment is uncertain.
Task interdependence means that the work of one person is highly dependent on the work of others. Patient care typically involves a multitude of disciplines that must coordinate their work, and this requires intense communication. Teams therefore are appropriate, because this type of structure can foster communication between the various disciplines. Finally, teams are appropriate to use when the task objectives are clear and time-bound. One approach for making task objectives clear is to develop a team charter. The charter contains the following information77:
•Description of the process, why it needs improvement, and who is affected;
•Development of criteria to demonstrate that the process improved;
•Timeline for meetings;
•Resources available;
•Structure of leadership (e.g., self-managed, leader-directed); and
•Expected communication of progress and results.
How Teams Develop and Grow
Teams develop, mature, and change over time. Tuckman78 described four stages of development in one popular model with somewhat predictable stages. This classic framework continues to be used to this day.
Stage 1. Forming. During the first stage, the members try to get to know each other, agree on the goal or vision, and delegate tasks. They cautiously explore boundaries to determine acceptable group behavior. Discussions focus on how to accomplish the tasks and the information and resources needed, and the team accomplishes little at this stage. This is a period of testing to find out what kind of behavior is appropriate. Members tend to defer to the leader or dominant member for guidance. In this stage, team leaders need to be directive and provide role clarification. Members get to know each other, agree on goals, and delegate tasks; members may feel anxiety, excitement, and uncertainty, and they may test boundaries of behavior. The team leader needs to be directive, with high-task relationships, and provide role clarification. The team depends on the leader during this learning stage. This stage is short if the tasks are clearly defined and easily achievable.
Stage 2. Storming. This second stage is where conflict typically arises. Members try to express their individuality and resist group pressures and influence. There often are emotional responses to group demands, especially if the group is under pressure to achieve results. To prevent the group from becoming stuck at this stage, leaders need to manage the conflict, not by suppressing it but by using it to energize the team. Conflict and tension often arise, and members assert their individual roles and compete for control. The leader moves to a coaching style of leadership. At this stage, reality sets in. There is the realization that the task may be difficult, they notice their lack of progress, and there is resistance to the task. Resources are applied to the task rather than education about the problem. People are willing to suggest tasks, and the leader then delegates the tasks. People do not take responsibility for problems, yet the team is building cohesion. This is probably the most difficult stage. Arguing, defensiveness, disunity, and tension are often evident.
Stage 3. Norming. In this stage, members develop close ties and a strong identity with the team. There is a shift from “I” to “we” and a willingness to accept the views of others. Team
p. 178
p. 179
members develop feelings of mutual respect, harmony, and trust. Group standards and members’ roles emerge. Leaders need to challenge the team members to continue to grow and guard against too much conformity to group norms. The team develops close ties and a strong identity; members develop harmony by avoiding conflict. Tentative constructive criticism is allowed. A supporting leadership style evolves. Concern moves from silos to the inter-professional group. Members volunteer evidence-based solutions instead of just providing vague suggestions. There is an emerging leadership or ownership of functional roles by the members. There is acceptance of team rules, norms, and roles and finally optimism that things work out. More harmony, cohesion, and discussion of team dynamics occur.
Stage 4. Performing. In the fourth stage, the team works harmoniously toward a common goal and is very productive. The team develops a functional but flexible structure, and roles are interrelated. Interpersonal conflicts are resolved, and the group is highly task oriented. In this stage, the leader needs to develop mechanisms for sharing leadership responsibilities. The team works harmoniously and gains insight into the team’s process. Improvement of the team’s process and team identification begins to predominate. The team is task oriented and accomplishes its work. Goal orientation is now optimized, and task competency is high. High morale, support, and appreciation come from team members. Roles diminish, and participation by all is encouraged. The team may begin to take on additional responsibilities and is functioning at an optimal level.
Not all teams progress through these four stages, and if they do, they probably move back and forth through the stages as new issues are identified or new members join the team. Nevertheless, the stages point to important developmental issues having implications for team leaders, facilitators, and coaches. Lack of effectiveness often results from leadership and facilitation problems and a lack of clear goals and expectations. Teamwork components of cohesiveness, communication, role clarity, and goal clarity from The Team Handbook79 are integrated into these specific roles found in stages in TABLE 3-11.
Table 3-11 Team Roles
Sponsor
Sponsors are the formal leaders and prime movers of the project. They align resources and monitor progress. Sponsors hold others accountable to get on with change. The sponsor inspires the team members to say, “I believe in this project.” Some project tasks require sponsors at multiple levels to obtain adequate resources and buy-in from the entire project team.
Champion
Champions are the respected opinion leaders who provide credibility to the project and are integral to the social structure. The champions are respected clinicians or staff with influence through clinical reputation or leadership qualities. Their experience provides credibility for the project team and task. They support the change and work for its implementation by speaking favorably about it and sharing their first-hand knowledge or experience.
Leader
Leaders guide the team to achieve successful outcomes and attain the established goals. They are responsible for guiding the team through the process to achieve the aim or goals. They provide direction and support. The team leader knows meeting procedures and has strong communication and interpersonal skills.
Timekeeper
The timekeeper monitors meeting agendas, ensures the team is aware of the time allotted for each agenda item, and reminds the team when they go over the allotted time.
ProcessOwner
The process owner is the leader among frontline staff directly involved in the process. This is the team member who is responsible and accountable for sustaining improvements during and after implementation. Ideally, the process owner should be someone with authority over frontline staff directly involved in the process evaluation.
Facilitator
Although facilitators (change agents or coaches) have no formal authority over other team members, they are instrumental in implementing the change through planning, helping, and facilitating. The facilitator is not vested in the project but is skilled in problem solving and adult learning and has good communication and interpersonal skills. As change agents, they are the technical experts on the team; they influence progress by gathering measurable data and information. They listen to the concerns of other team members and help remove barriers. They support the sponsors by advancing the team’s work to goal achievement.
They promote effective group dynamics and are concerned with how decisions are made. They may also serve as coaches or consultants. They keep the team on track. They provide expertise on using tools. Coaches focus on helping the team to learn rather than teaching them. The facilitator needs to have a clear perception of the facts and information and the ability to determine what is relevant. That ability includes an understanding of systems, dynamics, relationships between system components, and psychology. The facilitator, change agent, or coach needs to understand when and how emotions or desires distort one’s perception.
Member
A member is an actual representative on the team. Although project team composition varies, in most cases the project team includes the frontline staff (e.g., nurses, physicians, clerks, ancillary services staff) and area supervisors directly affected by the project task. To identify these personnel, consider all relevant stakeholders to the process. The ideal team size is 8–12 people. Unless necessary, team size should not exceed 15 people. They can collect data and information related to the process of focus. For the stakeholders not represented, develop a communication mechanism (team minutes, session report) and designate one or more people to disseminate this information regularly. Chosen team members must be able to commit to attend team meetings and meet their responsibilities.
Scribe
The scribe role may be assigned to one person or rotated between members. The role includes documenting minutes of meetings and other recordkeeping activities.
p. 179
p. 180
Characteristics of Effective Teams
It is widely known that teams often fail to produce the results for which they were brought together. What makes a team successful? Abundant research and practice demonstrate the important predictors of team success80–82:
•Competent members with technical, problem-solving, interpersonal, and organizational skills;
•Commitment to clear, common goals;
•Standards of excellence;
•Contributions from every member;
•Collaborative environment (culture to support teamwork);
•Leadership support;
•Nonhierarchical structure; and
•External support and recognition.
Characteristics of effective and ineffective teams are further described in TABLE 3-12. Four key traits can predict a team’s success: (1) Cohesiveness; (2) Communication; (3) Clear roles; and (4) Clear goals.79
Table 3-12 Team Characteristics
Effective Teams
Ineffective Teams
Mutual agreement and identification with respect to the team goal
Open communication between members
Mutual trust and support
Management of human differences
Selective use of the team
Appropriate member skills
Leadership
Values and goals of the members interpreted as needs and values of the team
Team believes it can accomplish the impossible
Understands the value of constructive team cohesiveness and how to use it
Mutual influence between members and the leader
Exhibits clear goals, purposes, discussions, and decisions
Agrees on the goal
Has formally defined roles
Revises plan as needed
Uses tool to map the process and project steps
Effectively uses talents of members
Balances participation of all members
Discusses issues openly
Clarifies ideas or issues
Uses consensus-based decision-making
Uses data for problem solving
Applies resources and training throughout the project
Does not distinguish between facts, opinions, and feelings
Does not separate idea generation from idea evaluation
Prematurely closes discussion before all alternatives are identified
Dominated by aggressive members
Fails to assign specific responsibilities
Does not review minutes, tasks, or due dates
Works on problems that are outside the scope of the team
Exhibits uncertainty about the team’s direction
Launches many improvement projects without clear objectives
Fails to apply discussion skills
Hides a secret agenda
Relies on one person to manage discussion without sharing responsibility
Discusses the project outside the meeting rather than bringing issues to the team
Repeats points of discussion
Concedes to opinions rather than fact-based data
Uses majority rule rather than consensus in disagreements
Uses decision by default, with silence assumed as consent
Avoids certain topics
Does not acknowledge ground rules
Has recurring differences on acceptable behavior
Has conflicting expectations
Does not attend to clues or shifts in the team mood
Makes remarks that discount someone’s behavior or contribution
Cohesiveness is the social glue that binds the team members together as a unit. Cohesiveness can be increased by the establishment of ground rules, or norms, addressing how meetings are run, how team members interact, and what kind of behavior is acceptable. Each member is expected to respect these rules, which usually prevents misunderstandings and disagreements. Balanced participation is encouraged to strengthen the team’s cohesion. Because every team member has a stake in the achievements, everyone participates in discussions and decisions, shares the commitment to the project’s success, and contributes their talents. The use of brainstorming or a nominal group technique to obtain input from all team members during discussions is one method to encourage members to bond. When a team is cohesive, members are attracted to the team; find membership in the team to be a personally meaningful experience; enjoy the company of the other team members; support, nurture, and care for each other; feel free to share ideas and suggest ways to improve team function; feel they are using their unique skills for the benefit of the team; have a strong “we” feeling; and routinely develop creative solutions to problems.
Communication is the next key component to successful teams. Communication involves a full range of topics, including decision-making and problem solving. Effective communication becomes easier once the team develops a certain level of cohesiveness. Communication is key because further team development and effective functioning cannot occur without team communication. When a team is communicating effectively, team members
•freely say what they feel and think;
•are always direct, truthful, respectful, and positive;
•openly discuss all decisions before they are made;
•handle conflict in a calm, caring, and healing manner;
•openly explore options to solve problems when they arise; and
•do not gossip about each other, have unknown alliances, or hidden agendas.
Effective, clear communication depends on how information is exchanged between team members. Ideally, team members speak clearly, directly, and succinctly. They ask questions in an inviting way. Members listen actively and avoid interrupting when others are speaking. The team encourages all members to use the skills and practices that make discussions and meetings more effective. Team members initiate discussions, seek information and opinions, suggest procedures, elaborate on ideas, complete assignments on time, and summarize.
Team leaders and facilitators act as gatekeepers during communication by managing member participation, keeping discussion focused, and resolving differences creatively. Considering the stage of team development, such as storming, leaders and facilitators may need to ease tension and work through difficulties. Communication also includes well-defined decision-making procedures.
p. 180
p. 181
The role of champion can greatly benefit engagement in a quality or safety effort. The ideal champion is perceived as credible and able to influence others to adopt or implement a new process as part of the patient safety or quality effort. Physician champions are especially effective in improving physician engagement in quality and safety efforts. Champions are also critical for successful teams in healthcare settings. They can contribute to the success of projects, innovations and other organizational change initiatives.
A team is always aware of the different ways it reaches consensus. The team discusses how decisions are made, explore important issues by polling, test for agreement, and use data as the basis for decisions. Occasionally, the team may want to designate a member to observe team interactions and give feedback on how decisions are made so the group can talk about any changes it needs to make. Team members are also sensitive to nonverbal communication. This includes seeing, hearing, and feeling the team dynamics.
Role clarity is the next area to facilitate team success. The roles are common among teams but they may differ slightly depending on the type of team that is convened. The role of team member supersedes individual professional roles. Although professional roles brought to the team give the team its potential strength, it is also important for team development that individuals feel equally valued. In addition, team members know who is doing what and what other team members expect of them. When a team achieves role clarity, members feel that accomplishments of the team are placed above those of individuals, understand the roles and responsibilities of all other team members, and there is a clear understanding of what other team members expect of them. A team facilitator is clearly identified. Facilitation requires skills that are both art and science. A skilled facilitator guides group process in an unbiased manner ensuring that the meeting agenda is carried out and decisions are responsibly reached with independent contributions from all team members.
The final component of team development to become a fully functioning and high-performing team is clearly defining team goals and the means used to reach these goals. When a team achieves goal clarity, team members agree on what the
p. 181
p. 182
real work of the team is, clearly understand the goals, agree on how to reach the goals, and agree on clear criteria for evaluating the outcomes of the team. Teams operate most efficiently when they tap everyone’s talents and when all members understand their duties and know who is responsible for what issues and tasks. Goal clarity begins with a charter.
Successful teams are one of the most important aspects of effective organizational functioning and quality, safety and PI efforts. Two special team types have patient safety as their focus but include essential elements of teams that increase their ability to address patient safety and error reduction. The first is Team Strategies and Tools to Enhance Performance and Patient Safety (TeamSTEPPS®), a teamwork system designed for healthcare professionals. This is an evidence-based teamwork system designed to improve communication and teamwork skills. Team members learn four primary teamwork skills: leadership, communication, situation monitoring, and mutual support. Three types of team outcomes are desired: performance, knowledge, and attitudes.
The TeamSTEPPS model is based on lessons learned, change models, the literature of quality and patient safety, and culture change. Phase 1 assesses an organization’s readiness for undertaking the initiative. Phase 2 includes planning, training, and implementation; options in this phase include tools and strategies. Phase 3 sustains and spreads improvements in teamwork performance, clinical processes, and outcomes.83 See the section Patient Safety for more information on TeamSTEPPS.
The second special type of team is Crew Resource Management (CRM). A specific CRM training program based on airline safety was developed for healthcare. Although the team is focused on patient safety, the effectiveness of team functioning is a first critical component.84 Additional elements include a focus on the patient safety mindset and high-reliability functioning. The team learns skills in decision-making under stressful situations through continued practice, simulation, and use of checklists to embed teamwork behaviors into daily work and provide numerous opportunities to practice the desired behaviors.
For those organizations employing Six Sigma or Lean methods, a Workout is a fast track change acceleration process developed originally at General Electric. The Workout is conducted by a group of team members in a short time (hours or days).85 With well-defined team roles and clear direction defined in a challenge statement and goal the Workout is a good example of the effective use of teams for rapid PI. This process has also been called Rapid Process Improvement Workshop in some organizations.
Evaluating Team Performance
Evaluating team performance is important to the overall effectiveness of an organization’s operations and improvement efforts. Three key actions determine the success of any team and are used for evaluation:
1.Developing shared goals and methods to accomplish outcomes;
2.Developing methods and skills to communicate and make decisions across systems and organizations; and
3.Engaging leadership that balances getting input and making decisions, so work moves ahead.
Team performance also requires formal evaluation. In general, evaluation of a team includes three criteria:
1.Productivity or results: The extent to which the goals were met. Did the team accomplish what it set out to do and within the defined time frame?
2.Satisfaction of team members: It is important that team members can work together in the future. To the extent that members are satisfied with the team, they are more likely to work well together in the future.
3.Individual growth: The extent to which individual members developed professionally by serving as team members.
A more formalized manner of evaluating team performance includes the following process criteria:
•Organizational alignment:
⚬Does the team have statements of mission, vision, values, structures, roles, and goals?
⚬Does the team have a charter? Are the purpose and goals important to the organization’s strategic priorities?
•Goal clarity: Are there clearly stated goals, and do actions exist to achieve the goals?
•Leadership: Is there clear leadership support of the team?
•Roles: Are team roles been defined?
•Norms: Does the team define ground rules and abide by them?
•Team participation: Do all members of the team participate and share tasks?
•Team meetings: Are team meetings organized with agendas, time frames, action plans, and decisions?
•Competency to perform tasks: Are members trained to work on tasks?
•Communication: Is communication open, honest, and constructive?
•Atmosphere: Is the atmosphere warm, accepting, and supportive for all team members?
•Decision-making: Does the team achieve consensus on decisions and look at multiple alternatives before reaching a decision?
•Problem solving: Is the team able to validate problem identification before moving to a solution by using sound data and tools?
•Conflicts: Does the team have a process for constructively managing interpersonal conflict?
p. 182
p. 183
•Performance management: Does the team manage its performance, or must management intervene?
•Work tools and training: Has the team been trained on tools and data management to function effectively?
•Boundary management: Has the team developed relationships with other teams, stakeholders, and customers?
Healthcare quality professionals play an important role in leading or facilitating PI projects. Many different types of improvement projects may be chartered. They vary in breadth, scope, and duration. There are also different names that may be assigned to projects, but they all can be categorized under the umbrella of quality and safety. For example, there may be rapid process improvement teams, green belt project teams, black belt project teams, Lean projects, Six Sigma projects, and redesign projects. They are similar in their basic approach. The types of tools and level of statistical analysis may vary by type of team. Depending on the complexity of the project, a simple action plan may be sufficient, or the use of a Gantt or Program Evaluation Review Technique chart for project management might be more helpful.
A basic approach and actual steps in a PI project include the following:
1.Alignment with priorities and strategic goals and objectives.
a.This first step ensures the leaders support this project because it aligns with the strategic goals and PI priorities and are willing to devote resources to it.
2.A team charter is usually written at this point and describes the scope, boundaries, expected results, and resources used by a process improvement team.
a.The individual or group who formed the team usually provides the charter.
b.Sometimes the process owner or the team members develop a charter.
c.A charter is always needed for a team working on a process that crosses departmental lines.
d.A charter may not be necessary for a team that is improving a process found solely within a work center or office space.
3.Basic team functions are identified
a.members of the team.
b.roles within the team.
c.meeting schedule.
d.project timeline.
e.resources available and needed to complete the improvement project.
f.expected communication of progress and results.
4.Clear, defined aim for the team to work toward a common goal.
5.Analysis of baseline performance and problem identification is needed to determine the level of improvement.
6.A map of the process (current and ideal) is developed.
7.Description of the process: why it needs improvement and who is affected.
8.Development of criteria to demonstrate that the process is improved.
9.Measurement of success; this includes the numerator and denominator for a percentage, rate, or other weighted measure.
10.Changes to be tested and implemented.
a.Tests of change supported by data collection, analysis, and reporting.
b.Control or methods to sustain the change.
11.Results or outcomes of the project.
12.Reporting of the project and results to leaders, the organization, or others.
13.Evaluation tools for the team process.
Aligning Incentives to Advance Quality
Reward systems are critical to the success of quality, safety and PI initiatives. In fact, “The most damaging alignment problem to which many total quality failures have been attributed is the lack of alignment between expectations that arise from total quality change processes and reward systems.”86(p362) Rewards are important because they can motivate people. Motivating people to provide excellent customer service is a top priority for most organizations. Therefore, before discussing rewards, it is important to understand motivation.
Basics of Motivation
Work motivation is “the psychological forces that determine the direction of a person’s behavior in an organization, a person’s level of effort, and a person’s level of persistence.”87(p181) There are many theories of motivation and each has somewhat different but complementary implications for actions that motivate employees. Therefore, a basic understanding of major theories is important.
Need Theories. Need theories center on what employees are motivated to obtain from work (outcomes). These theories include Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, McClelland’s need theory, and Hertzberg’s two-factor theory.
Maslow’s88 need theory was first published in 1943. Maslow, a psychologist, believed that human needs could be arranged in a hierarchy from the most basic to higher order needs, as follows:
•Physiologic or survival needs (basic survival needs such as food and water);
•Safety or security needs (protection from harm or physical deprivation);
•Belongingness or social needs (the need for interaction with others, companionship, belonging, and friendship);
p. 183
p. 184
•Esteem or status needs (needs for recognition and appreciation); and
•self-actualization needs (the need for self-fulfillment or to reach one’s highest potential).
Maslow believed that basic needs had to be met before higher order needs. For example, basic survival needs are met (e.g., working in a safe environment) before employees focus on esteem needs. In addition, Maslow maintained that only unsatisfied needs served to motivate people; people want what they do not have.
McClelland proposed a concept like Maslow’s, narrowing the number of needs to three types: achievement, power, and affiliation.89
Finally, Herzberg’s two-factor theory classified the elements of motivation into two categories: motivators and hygiene factors.90 Motivators are the elements of a job that increase job satisfaction, including challenging work, achievement, recognition, growth, and advancement. Hygiene factors, on the other hand, do not contribute to motivation, but their absence leads to dissatisfaction. Hygiene factors include company policy and administrative issues such as supervision, working conditions, interpersonal relations, safety, salaries, morale, and productivity. Herzberg expanded on Maslow’s theory, making a distinction between factors that motivate and factors that maintain motivation.
At least two managerial implications for motivation are clear from need theories:
•There are many different needs, and these differ between employees.
•If employees are not motivated, managers seek to determine the needs of employees and which are satisfied or dissatisfied.
The relationship between Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs and employee engagement is shown as FIGURE 3-32.
Figure 3-32 Maslow’s hierarchy of needs applied to employee engagement.
Expectancy Theory. Expectancy theory is concerned with how people decide which behaviors to engage in and how much effort they give to that behavior. This theory focuses on the person’s perception of effort-to-performance and performance-to-outcome links. Essentially, a person asks, “If I work hard (effort), will I be able to perform?” Motivation is improved by strengthening that link. Managers want to be certain that employees believe that if they work hard, they will achieve high performance. Thus, providing training and education so that they have the appropriate skills to perform the work would improve motivation. In accordance with this theory, managers do the following:
•Be certain employees possess the necessary skills to perform well.
•Coach employees to believe that if they work hard they will be successful.
•Know what outcomes employees perceive as important (as detailed by needs theory).
•Establish clear policies about what levels of performance are rewarded (result in outcomes) and which levels are not.
Individuals also ask themselves, “If I perform at a high level, will there be an outcome, and is it something I care about?” To strengthen this performance-outcome link, managers want employees to believe that if they perform at a high level, there is an outcome that they desire. Managers can strengthen this link by having valid performance appraisal systems to capture quality and safety performance. Systems should also be in place to reward such performance. For example, when an employee reports an adverse event, there should be an immediate outcome that is positive in the eyes of that employee.
Equity Theory. Equity theory centers on the input and outcomes part of the motivation equation. The overall idea is that employees are motivated when there is fairness in the workplace. This theory contends that employees determine
p. 184
p. 185
fairness by looking at the ratio of their inputs (work effort) to their outcomes (e.g., rewards, benefits). For example, Employee A may be motivated if he or she receives a financial bonus that he or she perceives to be equitable given his/her effort on the PI project. However, employees also compare the ratio of their inputs to outcomes with others’ inputs and outcomes. Therefore, if Employee B in the same department is awarded a larger financial bonus for the same amount of effort, Employee A’s motivation would probably drop. Some ways for managers to motivate employees include the following:
•Acknowledge different performance levels with different levels of rewards.
•Employ just culture principles and practices (see the section Patient Safety).
•Periodically check employees’ perceptions about their own input and outcomes as well as those of others (through annual employee engagement surveys).
•Know what outcomes are desirable and tie those to performance in a timely manner.
Procedural Justice. Procedural justice is a theory of motivation that focuses on fairness with respect to processes or procedures used to allocate outcomes. Research demonstrates that people are more likely to see outcome allocations as fair when the following conditions exist:
•Input from employees is sought and considered when decisions are made.
•There is an opportunity for performance errors to be corrected.
•Rules and policies for allocation of outcomes are applied consistently.
•Decisions are made in an unbiased manner.
What Employees Say
There is research support for these various motivation theories. In the past 25 years, the Gallup Organization undertook two extremely large studies. The first asked, “What do the most talented employees need from their workplace?” For this part of the research, Gallup interviewed more than 1 million people who were employed across a broad range of companies, industries, and countries. This study’s “most powerful” conclusion is that the retention and performance of an employee is determined “by his relationship with his immediate supervisor.”91 So, what makes a good supervisor? Gallup’s data indicate that there are 12 factors critical to the retention and performance of employees:
•Do I know what is expected of me at work?
•Do I have the materials and equipment I need to do my work correctly?
•Do I have the opportunity at work to do what I do best every day?
•In the last 7 days, did I receive recognition or praise for doing good work?
•Does my supervisor, or someone at work, seem to care about me as a person?
•Is there someone at work who encourages my development?
•Do my opinions seem to count at work?
•Does the mission or purpose of my work organization make me feel my job is important?
•Are my coworkers committed to doing high-quality work?
•Do I have a best friend at work?
•In the last 6 months, has someone at work talked to me about my progress?
•This past year, have I had opportunities at work to learn and grow?
More recently, Harter and Adkins92 discussed the fact that employees want more from their managers. They found that
1.managers account for up to 70% of variance in engagement;
2.consistent communication is connected to higher engagement; and
3.managers must help employees develop their strengths.
These factors clearly are consistent with the theories of motivation discussed previously.
Setting Up an Incentives and Reward System
Given the role rewards play in employee motivation, setting up an effective reward system is important. Seven steps are fundamental to a reward system93:
•Determine priorities and values; rewarded behaviors are prioritized.
•Identify the criteria or milestones.
•Establish a budget for recognition.
•Determine who is accountable for managing the recognition.
•Develop specific procedures and features of the rewards and recognition.
•Obtain feedback from employees on desired rewards and recognition.
•Modify program based on feedback.
The most important step is to reward the desired behavior.94
Sharing Successes of Teams, Projects, and Initiatives
Sharing organization success stories internally and externally is important for several reasons. As described earlier, it motivates employees and serves as both reward and recognition to them. The value is demonstrated to the employees in increasing knowledge transfer, learning from experience, sharing best
p. 185
p. 186
practices, and stimulating innovation within the organization. Value is next demonstrated to the customer in showcasing successful processes and outcomes to the people served. Communicating successes also demonstrates accountability and transparency to the community and public served. There may be other stakeholders for whom communicating success is also important.
Externally, sharing of lessons learned with other organizations, professional groups, online communities, and the public might be performed in different ways. Some of the more common groups for sharing are professional conferences, committees, and professional organizations. The report format often includes
•abstract,
•title,
•objectives,
•outline,
•content,
•results, and
•references.
In addition, sometimes the A3 format is used (FIG. 3-33) to address an improvement process. This format is usually standardized from Lean/Six Sigma projects. This usually includes the background; current condition; goal; analysis; proposal/recommendation/countermeasure; plan; follow-up.95
Figure 3-33 Example of A3 format. (From Shook, John Y. Managing to Learn: Using the A3 Management Process. Cambridge, MA: Lean Enterprise Institute. Copyright © 2010, Lean Enterprise Institute, Inc., Cambridge, MA, lean.org. Lean Enterprise Institute, is a registered trademark of Lean Enterprise Institute, Inc., All rights reserved. Used with permission.)
The form in which communication takes place can also include face-to-face presentations, webinars, posters and storyboards, publications, and social networking tools. Publications may be local newsletters, peer-reviewed journals, or online forums including blogs. It is necessary to follow specific submission guidelines for a poster, abstract, or article. The publishing organization defines poster measurements, labeling design, and key elements for text and graphics. Abstract criteria focus on topics of interest, maximum and minimum word limits, and categories to include. Journal articles must conform to author guidelines and use a specific writing style. In preparing for any of these external communication methods, it is essential to have samples of the work product reviewed to increase the chances of acceptance.
p. 186
p. 187
Recognition and Quality Awards
Quality professionals are often instrumental in completing applications for external quality awards as well as addressing internal quality awards. One framework used to understand PI in complex systems is the Baldrige National Health Care Criteria for Performance Excellence Framework (https://www.nist.gov/baldrige). The Baldrige Award was created in 1987, named for former U.S. Secretary of Commerce Malcolm Baldrige in tribute to his managerial ability. The award is given to organizations demonstrating a commitment to quality excellence. This model displays the principles of PI and shows the relationships between the structural, process, and outcome factors. Other common quality awards or designations are shown in TABLE 3-13.
Table 3-13 Common Quality Awards or Designations
Award
Sponsoring Organization
Eligibility
Recognition
Baldrige Performance Excellence Program
National Institute of Standards and Technology
National organizations (different sectors eligible, e.g., healthcare, education, business, government)
Performance excellence in 7 Baldrige categories
Beacon Award for Excellence
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses
Critical care hospital units (high acuity and critically ill patients)
Hospital nursing units
Deming Prize
Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers
Japan
Business total quality management performance
Individuals, business units, organizations
Healthcare Quality Recognition Awards
National Association for Healthcare Quality
Individual professional recognition, state recognition
Healthcare quality and safety
Hospital Rankings and Reports
U.S. News & World Report
Hospitals
Rankings by scores based on data that include survival, patient safety, nurse staffing and other factors
John M. Eisenberg Patient Safety and Quality Awards
National Quality Forum and The Joint Commission
Organizations whose accomplishments are clearly linked to the principles Dr. Eisenberg promoted throughout his career
Healthcare quality and safety
Long-term care national quality awards
American Health Care Association (AHCA)/National Center for Assisted Living (NCAL)
Long-term care and assisted living facilities
Commitment, achievement excellence
Magnet Recognition Program
(includes Pathway to Excellence)
American Nurses Credentialing Center
Healthcare organizations and systems
Nursing services and empirical outcomes for patients and nursing
Nicholas E. Davies Award
of Excellence
Health Information and Management Systems Society
Healthcare organizations
Utilization of health information technology to substantially improve patient outcomes and value
Robert W. Carey Performance
Excellence Award
Department of Veterans Affairs
Veterans Affairs organizations
Based on Baldrige criteria
Performance excellence in 7 categories
Medtronic Safety Culture & Technology Innovator Award
NPSF Lucian Leape Institute
Individuals and teams
Recognizes extraordinary and innovative initiatives to drive successful implementation of technology through culture change in healthcare
Safety Grade
The Leapfrog Group
Hospitals
Better systems in place to prevent medication errors, higher quality on maternity care and high-risk procedures, and lower readmission rates
Shingo Prize for Operational Excellence
Utah State University
Any industry
Any part of world
Customer focus and business results
State quality awards
States (public–private partnerships)
Individual states
Baldrige-like criteria or criteria set by states
p. 187
p. 188
There are other external awards not necessarily called quality awards but acknowledge high-performing organizations that demonstrate evidence of that performance per defined criteria. Usually through a rigorous evaluation process, the organization is selected for the award, prize, or designation.
Steps in evaluating readiness to apply for external quality awards include the following:
1.Demonstrate ownership and commitment to the cultural transformation for performance excellence.
2.Make the pursuit of quality an organizational commitment for the sake of intrinsic improvement, not just to win an award.
3.Create the organization cultural transformation by upholding the standards in daily practice.
4.Identify the specific quality reward or recognition program and requirements.
5.Review the standards and criteria.
6.Determine eligibility.
7.Develop a team approach to self-assessment (facilitator or coordinator and subject matter experts).
8.Perform a self-assessment or gap analysis of current performance compared with the standards or criteria (TABLE 3-14).
9.Identify strengths or evidence of compliance for each criterion.
10.Identify opportunities for improvement based on the criteria.
11.Prioritize findings from the self-assessment or gap analysis.
12.Plan a course of action to meet the standards; perform benchmarking (see Health Data Analytics for more information on benchmarking).
13.Develop an action plan based on the priority for each criterion.
14.Perform ongoing feedback and update evidence of compliance.
15.Determine who coordinates the application submission process.
16.Complete an application.
17.Submit the application.
18.Plan for a site visit and documentation of evidence.
19.Maintain an infrastructure to sustain the process.
20.Integrate/hardwire into daily operations.
21.Celebrate successes.
22.Plan for redesignation (Baldrige, Magnet).
Table 3-14 Sample Framework for Performing a Gap Analysis
Standard
Importance
(High, Medium, Low)
For High-Importance Areas
Stretch (Strength) or Improvement Goal
What Action Is Planned?
By When?
Who Is Responsible?
Standard
Strength or Evidence
1.
2.
Opportunity for Improvement
1.
2.
Standard
Strength or Evidence
1.
2.
Opportunity for Improvement
1.
2.
From Healthcare Criteria for Performance Excellence: Optional self-analysis worksheet. NAHQ thanks the Baldrige Performance Excellence Program at the National Institute of Standards and Technology for use of text/graphics from the Criteria for Performance Excellence. Gaithersburg, MD: Baldrige Performance Excellence Program; 2011. www.nist.gov/baldrige/publications/hc_criteria.cfm.
Recognition of Internal Customers
An important structural element in the quality, safety and PI program is recognizing internal customers. Every process has both internal and external customers. Most people readily understand the concept of being a supplier of goods to an external customer. However, the idea of internal customers is equally important.
An employee can be a customer when they receive material, information, or services from others in the organization. Conversely, an employee also can be a supplier when they provide material, information, or services to others in the organization or to external customers. For example, when a nurse sends a specimen to the laboratory, the nurse is the supplier and the laboratory is the customer. When the laboratory sends a report back to the nurse, the laboratory is the supplier and the nurse is the customer. Just as there are suppliers to
p. 188
p. 189
internal customers, those internal customers can, in turn, be suppliers to external customers. This approach can help to
•remind departments without direct contact with external customers that they are still a critical link to customer satisfaction;
•improve relationships;
•acknowledge the complexity of the work;
•make the work process flow smoothly; and
•avert potential bottlenecks.
TABLE 3-15 provides an example of an approach one organization followed to ensure the recognition of internal customers. Notice that the customer service standard pledge reflects the values necessary to make quality a reality (e.g., teamwork, information sharing).
Table 3-15 Customer Service Standards and Pledge
Respect Me and My Job
We Are All Professionals
Work and Communicate with Me
Smile—It’s Contagious
Our need: Respect.
Our response: I understand the need to be respectful, and I will
•acknowledge you,
•be sensitive to your point of view,
•thank-you for a job well done,
•value your time and priorities,
•discuss my concerns with you in private,
•value your job and its contribution to the organization,
•treat you as I would like to be treated, and
•speak to you in a pleasant tone in person or on the phone.
Our need: Professionalism.
Our response: I understand the need to represent the hospital in a professional manner, and I will
•take responsibility for my actions,
•protect confidential information about patients and fellow employees,
•look professional in dress, grooming, and manner,
•coach others when necessary, and
•follow through on my promise to you.
Our need: Teamwork.
Our response: I understand the need for teamwork, and I will
•pitch in and offer to help you whenever possible,
•ask for your input before making a decision that may affect you,
•talk to you directly instead of talking to others secretly if I have a concern,
•listen to you, offer positive advice, and not interrupt until you are finished,
•recognize that everyone has a valid opinion, and
•seek out information and share what I have learned.
Our need: Positive attitude.
Our response: I understand the need for a positive work environment, and I will
•be sensitive to the effects my actions have on others,
•replace criticism with positive ideas,
•try to see things through the other person’s eyes,
•attempt to leave any personal problems at home,
•coach my coworkers in portraying a positive attitude, and
•project a caring and concerned attitude.
Reprinted from Baird K. Customer Service in Health Care: A Grassroots Approach to Creating a Culture of Service Excellence. New York, NY: Wiley; 2000. Copyright 2000 by Jossey-Bass, with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
In most healthcare organizations and as above, service excellence is as important as clinical excellence. For example, Sharp HealthCare, a Malcolm Baldrige award recipient, implemented several initiatives that formed the foundation of service excellence—what they refer to as The Sharp Experience.96 These include the following:
1.AIDET: Acknowledge, Introduce, Duration, Explanation, Thank you.
2.Behavior Standards:
⚬attitude is everything,
⚬reward and recognition,
⚬courteous communication,
⚬teamwork,
⚬service recovery,
⚬zero harm,
⚬performance matters,
⚬service excellence,
⚬privacy and confidentiality,
⚬electronic communication manners,
⚬mutual respect, and
⚬diversity.
p. 189
p. 190
3.Must Haves
⚬Greet people with a smile and “Hello,” using their name when possible.
⚬Take people where they are going, rather than pointing or giving directions.
⚬Use key words at key times: “Is there anything else I can do for you? I have the time.”
⚬Foster an attitude of gratitude. Send thank-you notes to deserving employees.
•Round with reason to better connect with staff, patients, family, and other customers.
Storytelling is also part of the Sharp culture. The development and sharing of stories can be a potent means or promoting values and beliefs in an organization. StoryCorps, a nonprofit organization, helps organizations
remind one another of our shared humanity, to strengthen and build the connections between people, to teach the value of listening, and to weave into the fabric of our culture the understanding that everyone’s story matters. At the same time, we are creating an invaluable archive for future generations.97(p2)
The measurement of customer perception, satisfaction, engagement and loyalty is important for healthcare organizations to determine how their customers like the services provided. There are many vendors who survey these customers and provide data back to the organization for tracking, trending, and benchmarking performance.
The CMS identified customer perception as a key component of measuring hospital performance and developed the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems98 (CAHPS) survey as a standardized method to compare performance and link payment to performance. The Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) is the first national, standardized, publicly reported survey of patients’ perspectives of hospital care. Before the advent of HCAHPS, there was no national standard for collecting and publicly reporting information about patient experience of care that allowed comparisons across hospitals locally, regionally, and nationally.
The survey is designed to produce data about patients’ perceptions of care that allow objective comparisons of hospitals on topics that are important to consumers. Public reporting of the survey results increases accountability by increasing transparency in the quality of care. The CMS and the HCAHPS Project Team take steps to ensure the survey is credible, useful, and practical.
In 2002, CMS partnered with the AHRQ to develop and test the HCAHPS survey. In May 2005, the HCAHPS survey was endorsed by the NQF, and approval for the national implementation for public reporting occurred in March 2008. The survey, methods, and results are in the public domain.
p. 190
p. 191
The Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 created an additional incentive for acute care hospitals to participate in HCAHPS. As of July 2007, hospitals must collect and submit HCAHPS data to receive their full Inpatient Prospective Payment System annual payment update. Inpatient Prospective Payment System hospitals that fail to publicly report the HCAHPS survey may receive an annual payment update that is reduced by 2 percentage points. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (P.L. 111-148) includes HCAHPS among the measures to be used to calculate value-based incentive payments in the Hospital Value-Based Purchasing program, with discharges since October 2012. HCAHPS results are published on the Hospital Compare website four times a year.99 The survey consists of both inpatient and outpatient items depending on the population assessed.
Instruments are available for other settings such as for long-term care, but there are no comparative data collected or published for this setting and NCQA uses CAHPS version 5.0H survey as part of their HEDIS measures in evaluating health plan performance and accrediting plans.
Organizational Learning and Training
Everyone in the organization is responsible for quality and safety. Therefore, educating staff at all levels of the organization is critical to the success of quality and PI. Because the most common cause of failure in any performance or process improvement effort is uninvolved or indifferent top and middle management, it is essential that all leaders be educated from the start. Training begins at the top and cascades down through the organization. Ultimately, senior and middle management are part of the teaching team; this demonstrates to employees that they are committed to quality and safety.
The method of education or training must be tailored to the audience and use tools and methods to match the audience needs and learning styles. Governing body or board members must also be included in understanding and their accountability for quality of care in the organization. Some form of board training is often included for new members. A comprehensive program for all levels of employees, management, board, and physicians is designed to meet the needs of these different groups. For example, board member training includes
•a review of oversight responsibility for the organization’s quality and safety performance;
•some form of quality, safety and PI committee or review function;
•use of quality performance as a criterion in rating executive performance; and
•trends and public reporting of the organization’s data and its image in the community.
Determining Education and Training Needs
There are many ways to determine the educational needs of the healthcare workforce. Methods to obtain information include
•evaluating knowledge and skills contained in the job description;
•asking participants;
•asking participants’ supervisors;
•asking others who are knowledgeable about the job (e.g., customer, peers, experts in quality, safety and PI);
•testing participants on their skills and knowledge; and
•analyzing the participant’s past performance appraisals.93,100,101
Fundamentals of Performance Improvement Curriculum
The PI curriculum includes the following elements:
•Explanation of the need for organizational improvement, including individual and collective benefits of performance and process improvement;
•Development and use of common quality language or taxonomy;
•Discussion of the organization’s quality and safety goals;
•Definition of the program structure;
•Articulation of the organization’s philosophy and a model for improvement;
•Description of the improvement process;
•Description and clarification of responsibilities;
•Tools and techniques to participate in teams and to manage work processes;
•Description of how change may affect the individual’s job and work relationships;
•Metrics and successful past projects in the organization; and
•Reporting structure for leaders and staff.
Tailor training to the specific needs of each group (i.e., top management, middle management, frontline staff). TABLE 3-16 offers a comparison of topics addressed across major groups in a quality, safety, and PI curriculum. There are some common reasons why managers are often reluctant to support training in quality, safety and PI. These barriers must be overcome for the organization to develop the infrastructure necessary to support healthcare quality and safety. Barriers include no results from the training, too costly, no involvement in the process, no time for staff to participate, and lack of preparation of programs.102(pp2–4)
Table 3-16 Education and Training Topics
Top Management Topics
Middle Management Topics
Staff Topics
“What Everyone Should Know”
•Quality as a strategic advantage
•Role of leadership in creating and sustaining quality vision
•Integrating quality values into day-to-day leadership
•Indicators for measuring, evaluating and improving quality and organizational performance
•Components of performance excellence and implementation process
•Basic quality and performance improvement tools
•Role as team leaders
•Awareness of accreditation standards
•Role as team champion
•Key concepts of quality and performance management (e.g., customer satisfaction, process management, teamwork, continuous improvement methods)
•Management practices for building teamwork, employee involvement and recognition for customer service
•Team building and contributions for quality, team leadership skills, conflict resolution
•Communication skills, listening and giving feedback
•Principles of customer service
•Managing process performance
•(measurement, quality and performance improvement tools, variation, problem solving, data collection and analysis)
•Measurement of quality outcomes
•Accreditation/regulatory standards
•Organization’s mission, vision, and performance improvement plan
•Quality awareness, definition of quality
•Fundamental training in quality and performance improvement, including process improvement tools and techniques
•Concepts of quality management: customer satisfaction, process improvement, teamwork, continuous improvement
•Promoting cooperation between coworkers within and between departments
•Communication skills
•Customer service
•Relevant accreditation standards and regulatory requirements
Another approach to considering training is the IHI Improvement Advisor Professional Development Program,71 which includes the following agenda for training:
•science of improvement (includes high-reliability organizations),
p. 191
p. 192
•model for improvement,
•scoping improvement efforts,
•understanding systems and processes,
•using data for improvement,
•understanding relationships,
•gathering information,
•organizing information,
•developing powerful ideas for change,
•testing changes,
•implementing changes,
•decision-making,
•working with people, and
•planned experimentation.
The IHI’s Open School is a free resource to National Association for Healthcare Quality (NAHQ) members, students and faculty. It offers exceptional training resources for quality, safety and PI. Also, see the section Patient Safety for more information on learning systems and learning organizations.
Requisite Skills to Lead Performance and Process Improvement Efforts
The key operating assumption of capacity building is that different groups of people have different levels of need for knowledge and skills. A teaching plan ensures each group receives the knowledge and skill sets they need, when they need them, and in the appropriate amounts. FIGURE 3-34 shows a pyramid model in which experts need a high level of specific knowledge on PI, quality management, and tools, whereas most staff need a much lower level of knowledge in this area. For skill development, HQ Essentials from NAHQ offers a roadmap for achieving mastery in performance and process improvement. FIGURE 3-35 shows the dimension for cultural and process change management. Finally, being able to demonstrate financial and clinical outcomes requires planning and program development skills. Wiseman et al.103 offer a simple model for what is needed to get to outcomes by linking processes to improvement—planning, implementing, and evaluating (FIG. 3-36).
p. 192
p. 193
Through skill acquisition, healthcare quality professionals can lead performance and process improvement efforts and ensure appropriate methods and measures are used to achieve organizational goals and improve the health of individuals and populations.
Figure 3-34 Levels of knowledge.
Proficiency Levels and Descriptors
Competency
Proficiency 1: Advanced
Proficiency 2: Master
3.3.Use meaningful metrics to articulate return on investment of PPI project.
3.3.1a.Identify meaningful process and outcome measures.
3.3.1b.Explain the origin, reliability, validity, and accuracy of data and the sources used for benchmarking and comparison.
3.3.lc.Optimize decisions through the analysis of information and development of alternative hypotheses and action plans.
3.3.1d.Aid interpretation and communication of data and information by using visual display techniques.
3.3.2a.Advise the organization on the adoption of metrics to achieve value-based results.
3.4Mitigate barriers that impede sustainable change.
3.4.1a.Assess the status of workflow changes in identifying barriers to optimum adoptions.
3.4.1b.Develop plans to overcome barriers utilizing change management techniques.
3.4.2a.Apply organizational development principles and practices involving adaptive innovation.
3.4.2b.Implement strategies to address barriers within units and across the organization.
3.5.Monitor accountability structures and controls required to achieve improved performance.
3.5.la.Monitor adherence to workflows and policies and report compliance to the governance authority.
3.5.1b.Analyze the improved workflow and policy changes, recommending changes to continually advance performance improvement.
3.5.2a.Establish governance structures and processes to ensure accountability for adherence to workflows and policies.
3.5.2b.Investigate industry best practices to recommend innovations to continually advance performance improvement.
3.6.Provide the education, training, and tools necessary for effective implementation of process and workflow changes.
3.6.1a.Prepare training curricula and materials to train process owners on revised work processes and policies.
3.6.1b.Assist with training, process owners, team members, and sponsors on implementation and control plans.
3.6.2a.Implement a work process optimization training program.
3.6.2b.Provide an infrastructure for peer learning.
3.6.2c.Share the organization’s lessons learned and improvement results with external audiences.
Figure 3-35 Performance and process improvement competency (culture and change management). National Association for Healthcare Quality. Performance and Process Improvement. HQ Essentials: Competencies for the Healthcare Profession (2017).
Figure 3-36 Getting to outcomes: 10 steps to achieving accountability. (Reprinted from Wiseman S, Chinman M, Ebener PA, et al. Getting to Outcomes™: 10 Steps for Achieving Results-Based Accountability. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2007, with permission. https://www.rand.org/pubs/technical_reports/TR101z2.html.)
Section Summary
A formal quality, safety, and PI program and infrastructure are required to ensure quality and safety. Models of PI, acquired from industry, have been adopted and applied to the healthcare setting. The tenets of quality and safety must first be developed through strategic planning. Strategic planning is supported by the establishment of priorities for performance and process improvement activities, translating strategic goals into quality outcomes, and aligning culture and structure. Various PI tools can be used within a team to make significant changes to core processes, and ultimately ensure good clinical outcomes by using evidence-based principles and practices.
p. 193
p. 194
References
1.Gaucher EM, Coffey RJ. Transforming Healthcare Organizations: How to Achieve and Sustain Organizational Excellence. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers; 1991.
2.The W. Edwards Deming Institute. Deming the man: Dr. W. Edwards Deming; 2016. https://deming.org/deming-the-man/. Accessed April 30, 2017.
3.Deming WE. Out of the Crisis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 2000.
4.Deming WE. The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 2000.
5.The Juran Institute. About us: 2017. https://www.juran.com/about-us. Accessed April 30, 2017.
6.Juran JM. Juran on Leadership for Quality: An Executive Handbook. New York, NY: The Free Press; 1989.
7.Crosby PB. Quality Is Free: The Art of Making Quality Certain. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1979.
8.Hunt VD. Quality in America: How to Implement a Competitive Quality Program. Homewood, IL: Business One Irwin; 1992.
9.Westcott RT. The Certified Manager of Quality/Organizational Excellence Handbook, 4th ed. Milwaukee, WI: American Society for Quality; 2013.
10.Codman EA. A Study of Hospital Efficiency. Ann Arbor, MI: University Microfilms; 1916 & 1972.
11.Roberts JS, Redman RR, Coate JG. A history of the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals. J Am Med Assoc. 1987;258:936–940. doi:10.1001/jama.1987.03400070074038
12.Donabedian A. The Definition of Quality and Approaches to Its Assessment. Ann Arbor, MI: Health Administration Press; 1980.
13.Berwick DM. Continuous improvement as an ideal in health care. N Engl J Med. 1989;320(21):53–56. doi:10.1056/NEJM198901053200110
14.Batalden PB, Buchanan. Industrial models of quality improvement. In: N Goldfield, DB Nash, eds. Providing quality care. Philadelphia: American College of Physicians; 1998.
15.Berwick DM, Godfrey AB, Roessner J. Curing Health Care. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers; 1990.
16.James BC. Quality Management for Health Care Delivery. Chicago: The Hospital Research and Education Trust; 1990.
17.White SV. Interview with a quality leader: Brent James on reducing harm to patients and improving quality. J Healthcare Qual. 2007;29(5):35–44. doi:10.1111/j.1945-1474.2007.tb00211.x
18.Institute of Medicine, Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System, (L. T. Kohn, J. M. Corrigan, & M. S. Donaldson, Eds.). Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2000.
19.Berwick DM, Nolan TW, Whittington J. The triple aim: care, health and cost. Health Affairs. 2008;27(3):759–769. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.27.3.759.
p. 194
p. 195
20.Epstein RM, Street RL. Patient-Centered Communication in Cancer Care: Promoting Healing and Reducing Suffering. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 2007.
21.Pelletier LR, Stichler JE. Patient-centered care and engagement: nurse leaders’ imperative for health reform. J Nurs Admin. 2014;44(9):473–480. doi:10.1097/NNA.0000000000000102
22.American Hospital Association. The patient care partnership: understanding expectations, rights and responsibilities; 2003. http://www.aha.org/content/00-10/pcp_english_030730.pdf. Accessed April 30, 2017.
23.Center for Advancing Health. A New Definition of Patient Engagement: What Is Engagement and Why Is It Important? Washington, DC: Author; 2010.
24.Glascow R. Technology and Chronic Care. Paper presented at the Congress on Improving Chronic Care: Innovations in Research and Practice. September 8–10, Seattle, WA; 2002.
25.Kaplan S, Greenfield S, Ware JE. Assessing the effects of physician-patient interactions on the outcomes of chronic disease. Med Care. 1989;27(3, supplement):S110–S127. doi:10.1097/00005650-198903001-00010
26.Von Korff M, Gruman J, SchaefferJ, Curry SJ, Wagner EH. Collaborative management of chronic illness. Ann Intern Med. 1997;127(12):1097–1102.
27.Robbins SP. Organizational Behavior. 8th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall; 2001.
28.Kotter JP. What leaders really do. Harvard Bu Rev. 1990;68:103–111.
29.Kouzes JM, Posner BZ. Leadership: The Challenge. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2002.
30.American Hospital Association. Accountability: the pathway to restoring public trust and confidence for hospitals and other healthcare organizations; 1999. http://www.aha.org/content/00-10/AHAPrinciplesAccountability.pdf. Accessed May 1, 2017.
31.American Hospital Association and American Medical Association. Integrated leadership for hospitals and health systems: principles for success; 2015. https://www.ama-assn.org/sites/default/files/media-browser/public/about-ama/ama-aha-integrated-­leadership-principles_0.pdf. Accessed May 1, 2017.
32.U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Health Resources & Services Administration. Performance measurement and management; 2011. https://www.hrsa.gov/quality/­toolbox/508pdfs/performancemanagementandmeasurement.pdf. Accessed May 1, 2017.
33.Kaplan R, Bower M. The balanced scorecard and quality programs. Balanced Scorecard Report [Newsletter], 3–6. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Publishing; March 15, 2001.
34.Kaplan R, Norton D. Using the balanced scorecard as a strategic management system. Harvard Bus Rev. 1996;74:75–85.
35.Studer Group. https://az414866.vo.msecnd.net/cmsroot/studergroup/media/studergroup/pages/who-we-are/about-­studer-group/studergroup_infographic.pdf. Accessed May 2, 2017.
36.Provost L, Miller D, Reinertsen J. A Framework for Leadership for Improvement. Cambridge, MA: Institute for Healthcare Improvement; 2006.
37.White SV. Interview with a quality leader: David Brailer on information technology and advancing healthcare quality. J Healthcare Qual. 2004;26(6):20–25. doi:10.1111/j.1945-1474.2004.tb00531.x
38.Rosati RJ. Creating quality improvement projects. In: EL Siegler, S Mirafzali, JB Foust, eds. A Guide to Hospitals and Inpatient Care (pp. 326–338). New York, NY: Springer; 2003.
39.Reinertsen JL, Bisognano M, Pugh MD. Seven Leadership Leverage Points for Organization-Level Improvement in Health Care. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: Institute for Healthcare Improvement; 2011.
40.Sackett D, Rosenberg WMC, Muir-Gray JA, Haynes RB, Richardson WS. Evidence-based medicine: what it is and what it isn’t. Br Med J. 1996;312(13):71–72. doi:10.1136/bmj.312.7023.71
41.Tonelli M. The limits of evidence-based medicine. Respir Care. 2001;46(12):1435–1440. doi:10.1097/00001888-199812000-00011
42.Greenhalgh T. Narrative-based medicine in an evidence-based world. Br Med J. 1999;318:323–325. doi:10.1136/bmj.318.7179.323
43.Institute of Medicine, Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2001.
44.Deaton C. Outcomes measurement and evidence-based nursing practice. J Cardiovas Nurs. 2001;15(2):83–86.
45.Zander K, Bower K. Nursing Case Management, Blueprint for Transformation. Boston, MA: New England Medical Center Hospitals; 1987.
46.Every NR, Hochman J, Becker R, Kopecky S, Cannon CP, for the Committee on Acute Cardiac Care, Council on Clinical Cardiology, American Heart Association. Critical pathways: a review. Circulation. 2000;101:461–465. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.101.4.461.http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/101/4/461.full.
47.Rotter T, Kinsman L, James EL, et al. Clinical pathways: effects on professional practice, patient outcomes, length of stay and hospital costs. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;17(3), CD006632. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006632
48.Institute of Medicine. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2011. http://www.iom.edu/Reports/2011/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines-We-Can-Trust.aspx. Accessed May 2, 2017.
49.Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. National Guideline Clearinghouse. https://www.guideline.gov. Accessed May 1, 2017.
50.Resar R, Griffin FA, Haraden C, Nolan TW. Using Care Bundles to Improve Health Care Quality. IHI Innovation Series white paper. Cambridge, MA: Institute for Healthcare Improvement; 2012. http://www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/IHIWhitePapers/UsingCareBundles.aspx. Accessed May 2, 2017.
51.U.S. Department of Health & Human Services and Department of Justice. Health Care Fraud and Abuse Control Program Annual Report for Fiscal Year 2016; 2017. https://oig.hhs.gov/publications/docs/hcfac/FY2016-hcfac.pdf. Accessed May 2, 2017.
52.Institute for Healthcare Improvement. How to improve: Science of improvement: testing multiple changes; 2017. http://www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/HowtoImprove/ScienceofImprovementTestingMultipleChanges.aspx. Accessed May 2, 2017.
53.Chassin MR. Is health care ready for six sigma quality? Milbank Quart. 1998;76(4):565–591. doi:10.1111/1468-0009.00106
54.Ahmed S, Manaf NH, Islam R. Effects of lean six sigma application in healthcare services: a literature review. Rev Environ Health. 2013;28(4):189–194. doi: 10.1515/reveh-2013-0015.
55.Lean Enterprise Institute. Principles of lean. www.lean.org/WhatsLean/Principles.cfm. Accessed May 2, 2017.
56.MoreSteam. Lean six sigma online training; 2012. www.moresteam.com/lean-six-sigma/green-belt.cfm. Accessed May 2, 2017.
57.Naik T, Duroseau Y, Zehtabchi S, et al. A structured approach to transforming a large public hospital emergency department via lean methodologies. J Healthcare Qual. 2012;34(2):86–97. doi:10.1111/j.1945-1474.2011.00181.x
p. 195
p. 196
58.Chassin MR, Loeb JM. High-reliability healthcare: getting there from here. The Milbank Quart. 2013;91(3):459–490.
59.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2017. Opioid overdose. https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/. Accessed May 1, 2017.
60.Institute for Healthcare Improvement. Medication reconciliation to prevent adverse drug events; 2017. http://www.ihi.org/Topics/ADEsMedicationReconciliation/Pages/default.aspx. Accessed May 1, 2017.
61.National Quality Forum. National Quality Partners Playbook: Antibiotic Stewardship in Acute Care. Washington, DC: Author; 2016. http://www.qualityforum.org/Publications/2016/05/National_Quality_Partners_Playbook__Antibiotic_­Stewardship_in_Acute_Care.aspx. Accessed May 2, 2017.
62.The Joint Commission. Facts about federal deemed status and state recognition; 2016. https://www.jointcommission.org/facts_about_­federal_deemed_status_and_state_recognition/. Accessed May 1, 2017.
63.Stempniak M. Patient safety in the OR. Hospitals and Health Networks; 2012. http://www.hhnmag.com/articles/6184-­patient-safety-in-the-or. Accessed May 2, 2017.
64.Kim FJ, da Silva RD, Gustafson D, Nogueira L, Harlin T, Paul DL. Current issues in patient safety in surgery: a review. Patient Saf Surg. 2015;9:1–26. doi:10.1186/s13037-015-0067-4
65.Swing SR. The ACGME outcome project: retrospective and prospective. Med Teach. 2007;29:648–654. doi:10.1080/01421590701392903
66.Safer Healthcare. Checklists: a critical patient safety tool & guide. http://www.saferhealthcare.com/high-reliability-topics/checklists/. Accessed February 16, 2017.
67.Langley GL, Moen R, Nolan KM, et al. The Improvement Guide: A Practical Approach to Enhancing Organizational Performance. 2nd ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers; 2009.
68.U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Lean & Environment Toolkit: Chapter 5. https://www.epa.gov/lean/lean-environment-toolkit-chapter-5#definition. Accessed May 3, 2017.
69.Daley AT. Using Spaghetti Diagrams to Improve Process Flow. Chi Solutions, Inc.; 2009. https://www.chisolutionsinc.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/2009_10_Spaghetti-Diagrams-E-Postcard-­Article.pdf. Accessed May 2, 2017.
70.Gaskin SP, Griffin A, Hauser HR, Katz GM, Klein RL. Voice of the Customer. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. http://www.mit.edu/~hauser/Papers/Gaskin_Griffin_Hauser_et_al%20VOC%20Encyclopedia%202011.pdf. Accessed February 16, 2017.
71.Institute for Healthcare Improvement. Improvement advisor professional development program. www.ihi.org/offerings/Training/ImprovementAdvisor/Pages/default.aspx
72.Thompson L. Making the Team: A Guide for Managers. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall; 2000.
73.Xyrichis A, Ream E. Teamwork: a concept analysis. J Adv Nurs. 2008;61:232–241. doi/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2007.
74.Nancarrow SA, Booth A, Ariss S, et al. Ten principles of good interdisciplinary work. Hum Resour Health. 2013;11:1–19.
75.Andreatta PB. A typology for health care teams. Health Care Manage Rev. Oct–Dec 2010;35(4):345–354. doi:10.1097/HMR.0b013e3181e9fceb
76.Luecke R. Creating Teams with an Edge: The Complete Skill Set to Build Powerful and Influential Teams. Harvard Business Essentials Series. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press; 2004.
77.Schwarz M, Landis S, Rowe J. A team approach to quality improvement. Fam Pract Manage. April 1999;6:25–31.
78.Tuckman W. Developmental sequence in small groups. Psychol Bull. 1965;63:384–399. doi:10.1037/h0022100
79.Scholtes PR, Joiner BL, Streibel B. The Team Handbook. 3rd ed. Madison, WI: Joiner/Oriel; 2003.
80.Borrill C, West M, Shapiro D, Rees A. Team working and effectiveness in health care. Br J Healthcare Manage. 2000;6(8):364–371.
81.Lemieux-Charles L, McGuire ML. What do we know about health care team effectiveness? A review of the literature. Med Care Res Rev. June 2006;63(3);263–300. doi:10.1177/1077558706287003
82.Mitchell P, Wynia M, Golden R, et al. Core Principles & Values of Effective Team-Based Health Care. Washington, DC; IOM; October 2012.
83.Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. About TeamSTEPPS. http://teamstepps.ahrq.gov/about-2cl_3.htm. Accessed May 1, 2017.
84.American Combatives, Inc. Airline crew safety training program; 2009. www.americancombatives.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=66&Itemid=79. Accessed May 1, 2017.
85.Zuzelo PR. The Clinical Nurse Specialist Handbook. 2nd ed. Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett; 2010.
86.Evans JR, Dean JW. Total Quality: Management, Organization and Strategy. 3rd ed. Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western; 2003.
87.George JM, Jones GR. Organizational Behavior. 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall; 2002.
88.Maslow A. Motivation and Personality. New York, NY: Harper and Row; 1954.
89.McClelland DC, Atkinson JW, Clark RA, Lowell EL. The Achievement Motive. New York, NY: Irvington; 1976.
90.Herzberg F, Maysner B, Snyderman B. Works and the Nature of Man. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons; 1966.
91.Buckingham M, Coffman C. First, Break all the Rules: What the World’s Greatest Managers Do Differently. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster; 1999.
92.Harter J, Adkins A. Employees want a lot more from their managers. Gallup Business J. 2015. http://www.gallup.com/businessjournal/182321/employees-lot-managers.aspx. Accessed May 2, 2017.
93.Gaucher EJ, Coffey RJ. Total Quality in Healthcare: From Theory to Practice. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 1993.
94.Gunawardena I. Reward management in healthcare. Br J Healthcare Manage. 2011;17(11):527–530.
95.Shook J. A3 templates from Lean Enterprise Institute. Ambridge, MA: Lean Enterprise Institute; 2010. http://www.lean.org/common/display/?o=1314. Accessed May 2, 2017.
96.Sharp HealthCare. The Sharp experience; 2017. http://www.sharp.com/about/the-sharp-experience/. Accessed May 1, 2017.
97.StoryCorps. About us. http://storycorps.org/about. Accessed May 2, 2017.
98.Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. HCAHPS: Patients’ perspective of care survey; 2012. www.cms.gov/HospitalQualityInits/30_HospitalHCAHPS.asp. Accessed May 1, 2017.
99.Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. HCAHPS: Hospital care quality information from the consumer perspective; www.hcahpsonline.org. Accessed May 2, 2017.
100.Kirkpatrick DL. Evaluating Training Programs. 2nd ed. San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler; 1998.
101.Phillips J, Stone R. How to Measure Training Results: A Practical Guide to Tracking the Six Key Indicators. New York, NY: ­McGraw-Hill; 2002.
102.Phillips JJ, Phillips PP. Manager’s role in learning and performance; 2003. http://www.roiinstitute.net/wp-content/­uploads/2014/03/2014-ManagersRoleinLeaningandPerformance.pdf. Accessed May 2, 2017.
103.Wiseman S, Chinman M, Ebener PA, et al. Getting to Outcomes™: 10 Steps for Achieving Results-Based Accountability. Santa Monica: RAND Health; 2010:p. 2.
p. 196
p. 197
Suggested Reading & Other Resources
Almoosa KF, Luther K, Resar R, Patel B. Applying the new Institute for Healthcare Improvement inpatient waste tool to identify “waste” in the intensive care unit. J Healthcare Qual. 2016;38(5):e29–e38. doi:10.1097/JHQ.0000000000000040
American Association of Critical Care Nurses. Beacon Award for Excellence.TM https://www.aacn.org/nursing-excellence/­beacon-awards. Accessed May 2, 2017.
American Nurses Credentialing Center. Magnet Recognition Program®; 2017. www.nursecredentialing.org/Magnet.aspx. Accessed May 2, 2017.
Bailit M, Dyer M. Beyond Bankable Dollars: Establishing a Business Case for Improving Healthcare. New York, NY: The Commonwealth Fund; 2004.
Barry R, Murcko AC, Brubaker CE. The Six Sigma Book for Healthcare. Chicago, IL: Health Administration Press; 2002.
Becher EC, Chassin MR. Improving the quality of healthcare: Who will lead? Health Affairs. 2001;20:164–179. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.20.5.164
Berwick DM. Continuous improvement as an ideal in health care. New Engl J Med. 1989;320:53–56. doi:10.1056/NEJM198901053200110
Berwick DM, Godfrey AB, Roessner J. Curing Health Care. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 1990.
Berwick DM, Nolan TW, Whittington J. The triple aim: care, health and cost. Health Affairs. 2008;27(3):759–769. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.27.3.759
Blackmore CC, Williams BL, Ching JM, Chafetz LA, Kaplan GS. Using lean to advance quality improvement research. J Healthcare Qual. 2016;38(5):275–282. doi:10.1097/01.JHQ.0000462684.78253.a1
Brackett T, Comer L, Whichello R. Do lean practices lead to more time at the bedside? J Healthcare Qual. 2013;35(2):7-14. doi:10.1111/j.1945-1474.2011.00169.x
Brown MJ, Kor DJ, Curry TB, Marmor Y, Rohleder TR. A coordinated patient transport system for ICU patients requiring surgery: impact on operating room efficiency and ICU workflow. J Healthcare Qual. 2015;37(6):354–362. doi:10.1111/jhq.12019
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Partnership for patients and hospital engagement networks: continuing forward momentum on reducing patient harm; September 25, 2016. https://www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Fact-sheets/2015-Fact-sheets-items/2015-09-25.html. Accessed May 2, 2017.
Crawford B, Skeath M, Whippy A. Multifocal clinical performance ­improvement across 21 hospitals. J Healthcare Qual. 2015;37(2):117–125. doi:10.1111/jhq.12039
Denny DS, Allen DK, Worthington N, Gupta D. The use of failure mode and effect analysis in a radiation oncology setting: The Cancer Treatment Centers of America experience. J Healthcare Qual. 2014;36(1):18–28. doi:10.1111/j.1945-1474.2011.00199
Donabedian A. Exploration in Quality Assessment and Monitoring. Ann Arbor, MI: Health Administration Press; 1980.
Farrokhi FR, Gunther M, Williams B, Blackmore CCL. Application of lean methodology for improved quality and efficiency in operating room instrument availability. J Healthcare Qual. 2015;37(5):277–286. doi:10.1111/jhq.12053
Fottler MD, Ford RC, Heaton CP. Achieving Service Excellence: Strategies for Healthcare. Chicago, IL: Health Administration Press; 2002.
Fried BJ, Johnson JA. Human Resources in Healthcare: Managing for Success. Chicago, IL: Health Administration Press; 2001.
Gardner W, Morton S, Tinoco A, et al. Is it feasible to use electronic health records for quality measurement of adolescent care? J Healthcare Qual. 2016;38(3):164–174. doi:10.1097/01.JHQ.0000462675.17265.db
Gaucher EJ, Coffey RJ. Breakthrough Performance: Accelerating the Transformation of Health Care Organizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2000.
Griffith JR, White KR. Thinking Forward: Six Strategies for Highly Successful Organizations. Chicago, IL: Health Administration Press; 2003.
Hadelman J. The Impact of Strategic Healthcare Leadership: Top Ten Leadership Trends in Health Care in the 21st Century. Oak Brook, IL: Witt/Kieffer; 2000.
Helmrich RL, Merritt AC. Culture at Work in Aviation and Medicine. Aldershot: Ashgate; 1998.
Horak BJ. Strategic Planning in Healthcare: Building a Quality-Based Plan Step-by-Step. Portland, OR: Book News; 1997.
James BC. Quality Management for Health Care Delivery. Chicago, IL: The Hospital Research and Education Trust; 1990.
Johnson D, Snedeker K, Swoboda M, et al. Increasing therapist productivity: using lean principles in the rehabilitation department of an academic medical center. J Healthcare Qual. 2015;[Epub ahead of print]. Post Author Corrections: December 15, 2015. doi:10.1097/JHQ.0000000000000013
Juran JM. The QC circle phenomenon. Industrial Control. 1967 January;23:329–336.
Michael M, Schaffer SD, Egan PL, Little BB, Pritchard PSL. Improving wait times and patient satisfaction in primary care. J Healthcare Qual. 2013;35(2):50–60. doi:10.1111/jhq.12004
National Association for Healthcare Quality (NAHQ). NAHQ Code of Ethics and Standards of Practice for Healthcare Quality Professionals. Glenview, IL: Author; 2011. www.nahq.org/Quality-Community/content/codeethicspractice.html
Plsek P, Omnias A. Juran Institute Quality Improvement Tools: Problem Solving/Glossary. Wilton, CT: Juran Institute; 1989.
Rever H. Applying the DMAIC steps to process improvement projects “Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve, Control” is the roadmap to improving processes; n.d. http://www.iil.com/emailfiles/­downloads/ApplyingtheDMAICSteps_Harry%20Rever.pdf. Accessed May 2, 2017.
Singprasong R, Eldabi T. An integrated methodology for process improvement and delivery system visualization at a multidisciplinary cancer center. J Healthcare Qual. 2013;35(2):24–32. doi:10.1111/j.1945-1474.2011.00174.x
Tyler JL, Biggs E. Practical Governance. Chicago, IL: Health Administration Press; 2001.
Wilkinson C, Champion JD, Sabharwal K. Promoting preventive health screening through the use of a clinical reminder tool: an accountable care organization quality improvement initiative. J Healthcare Qual. 2013;35(5):7–19. doi:10.1111/jhq.12024
Young T, Brailsford S, Connell C, et al. Using industrial processes to improve patient care. Br Med J. 2004;328:162–164. doi:10.1136/bmj.328.7432.162
Online Resources
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
•Patients & Consumers
www.ahrq.gov/consumer/index.html
•Performance Improvement (PI) Plan & Template
https://innovations.ahrq.gov/qualitytools/performance-improvement-pi-plan-and-template
•Quality and Patient Safety
www.ahrq.gov/qual/pips/issues.htm
p. 197
p. 198
•CLABSI
https://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/education/curriculum-tools/clabsitools/index.html
•Talking Quality
www.talkingquality.ahrq.gov/content/about/default.aspx
American Heart Association
•Get With the Guidelines Patient Management Tool
http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/Professional/GetWithTheGuidelines-Resuscitation/Get-With-The-Guidelines-Resuscitation_UCM_314496_SubHomePage.jsp
•Americans for Quality Health Care Quality Tool Box: Consumer Engagement
www.nationalpartnership.org/site/PageServer?pagename=qcn_ToolBox_ConsumerEngagement
ANCC Magnet Recognition Program
www.nursecredentialing.org/Magnet.aspx
Association for Professionals in Infection Prevention and Epidemiology
http://www.apic.org/
Baldrige Performance Excellence Program
•Baldrige-Based State, Local and Regional Award Programs
www.nist.gov/baldrige/community/state_local.cfm
•Baldrige Excellence Builder
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/baldrige/publications/Baldrige_Excellence_Builder.pdf
•National Institute of Standards and Technology
www.nist.gov/baldrige/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
•Surgical-Site Infection
https://www.cdc.gov/HAI/pdfs/toolkits/SSI_toolkit021710SIBT_revised.pdf
•Sepsis
https://www.cdc.gov/sepsis/clinicaltools/
Institute for Healthcare Improvement (CLABSI, Ventilator, Obstetrics, Sepsis)
http://www.ihi.org/topics/bundles/Pages/default.aspx
The Commonwealth Fund
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/
The Leapfrog Group Hospital Ratings and Reports
http://www.leapfroggroup.org/ratings-reports
National Association for Healthcare Quality
•Performance and Process Improvement Essential Competencies
http://nahq.org/education/hq-essentials
•Quality Review and Accountability Essential ­Competencies
http://nahq.org/education/hq-essentials
Office of Inspector General—U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
https://oig.hhs.gov/
Quality Prizes and Awards
•AHCA/NCAL National Quality Award Program
www.ahcancal.org/quality_improvement/quality_award/pages/default.aspx
•American Association of Critical-Care Nurses Beacon Award for Excellence
www.aacn.org/wd/beaconapps/content/mainpage.pcms?menu=beaconapps
•National Association for Healthcare Quality—­Professional Recognition Awards
www.nahq.org/membership/leadership/prorecognition.html (Members only)
•National Quality Forum and Joint Commission John M. Eisenberg Patient Safety and Quality Awards
www.jointcommission.org/topics/eisenberg_award.aspx
•U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Robert W. Carey Performance Excellence Award
www.va.gov/OP3/docs/Carey/Robert_W_Carey_Performance_Excellence_Award.asp
•Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers Deming Prize
http://www.juse.or.jp/english/
•University of Utah Shingo Prize for Operational Excellence
www.shingoprize.org/model-guidelines.html
Partnership for Patients
https://partnershipforpatients.cms.gov/
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA; CAUTI)
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/675718
United Kingdom National Health Service
•Falls Prevention
http://www.knowledge.scot.nhs.uk/fallsandbonehealth/the-national-falls-programme/the-prevention-and-management-of-falls-in-the-­community-a-framework-for-action-for-scotland-2014-2016/falls-care-bundles-for-the-community-setting.aspx
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Health Resources & Services Administration
https://www.hrsa.gov/quality/toolbox/methodology/qualityimprovement/
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
•Lean Practices @ EPA
https://www.epa.gov/lean
U.S. News & World Report
•Best Hospitals Rankings & Ratings
http://health.usnews.com/best-hospitals
p. 198
