Quality Improvement
Project Management
Managing a quality improvement project is a critical skill for anyone interested in making care delivery —
and systems of care — better in their health care organization. To successfully manage improvement, team
leaders need specialized skills in QI project management, which has not typically been part of the
improvement curriculum.
This tool describes strategies to effectively manage quality improvement projects, specific ideas to try within
each strategy, and offers a workspace for you to note your next steps to implement the strategy.
Copyright © 2018 Institute for Healthcare Improvement. All rights reserved. Individuals may photocopy these materials for educational, not-for-profit uses,
provided that the contents are not altered in any way and that proper attribution is given to IHI as the source of the content. These materials may not be reproduced
for commercial, for-profit use in any form or by any means, or republished under any circumstances, without the written permission of the Institute for Healthcare
Improvement.
IHI TOOL
IHI TOOL: QI Project Management
Institute for Healthcare Improvement • ihi.org 2
Strategy Ideas to Try My Next Steps
Frontload the work
The start of an improvement project is
often more work and more challenging
because no progress has yet been made.
However, it is important to not shortcut
the planning (e.g., understand the
problem or opportunity, gather baseline
data and information, develop a
measurement plan, organize the team).
Dedicated and thoughtful planning time
at the beginning of a project is more
likely to lead to a successful project.
• Block time on your calendar to manage the upfront volume of work.
• Set up meetings with the team and the improvement project sponsor with
greater frequency in the first few weeks and less frequency over time.
• Hold a project kickoff event to study the process and define the aim, measures,
and change ideas: a full-day kaizen event, process mapping session, or team
retreat.
• Meet with your improvement project sponsor to ensure you agree on the
project scope, aim, constraints, and how you’ll work together.
• Use a checklist of tasks to show the team progress before you start testing.
• Create a set-up phase that is time-limited (e.g., 30 days) to ensure the team
does not get stuck in the planning phase.
• Set a date to pause the project if the set-up activities are not completed.
Build the team
Getting the right people doing the right
work in the right roles with the right
team culture is key to accelerating your
improvement work. The most effective
improvement teams leverage various
resources and organize the work to
make the most of the human assets in
the organization. Team leaders should
focus on building their core team and
then keep them engaged throughout the
improvement project.
• Ensure that the right people are on the team. If you can’t recruit a key
stakeholder (especially someone who might stop the improvement work),
consider the following:
o Change the project scope to be within the control of those who can be on the
team.
o Identify “consultants” to provide regular guidance to the team.
o Use your improvement project sponsor to gather support for the team.
• Invite improvement team members to lead specific change ideas and Plan-DoStudy-Act (PDSA) testing cycles, or measures and data collection and analysis.
• Engage your improvement project sponsor to help push the team beyond the
status quo, scope the project to the timeframe, and think through the
improvement project aim, change ideas, tests, and measures.
• To move more quickly, determine with the sponsor up front how and by whom
decisions will be made.
• Engage “historians” early to learn from past efforts and help the team make
predictions about whether something will work based on their past learning.
Confirm or change the predictions based on results of tests.
IHI TOOL: QI Project Management
Institute for Healthcare Improvement • ihi.org 3
Strategy Ideas to Try My Next Steps
Predict, create, and keep the
pace
To sustain momentum, it’s important to
keep improvement projects time‐limited
and to establish a work plan with
specific milestones.
• Set a start and end date for the improvement project.
• Based on your end date, create a work plan to help set the pace of
improvement:
o The work plan should include predicted milestones, the expected
trajectory, and reflection points to drive the pace.
o Unlike traditional work plans, what you do in the future will evolve based
on your testing and learning. You can, however, plan out your progress
toward the aim (e.g., when you will be testing, when you will be
implementing, when you will be 50% to goal).
o Build in points for reflection and celebration (learn from both successes
and failures).
• Look for opportunities to pick up the pace. For example, if you are collecting
data monthly, can you instead do it weekly or even daily? Meet more
frequently for less time using huddles.
• Frequent improvement team huddles and the use of visuals (e.g., run charts,
flowcharts, visual management boards) help the team keep pace and
communicate about the project work.
• Be intentional with time, always asking whether you are spending time in the
right way in service of your goal:
o Start meetings by reviewing the aim and predict how each PDSA cycle will
contribute to the larger goal. If you think the contribution will be minimal,
consider spending your time elsewhere.
o Make sure you’re spending more time on improvement than
measurement or paperwork.
• When you reach the end date of the improvement project, purposefully decide
to continue (setting a new end date and/or creating a new project charter) or to
conclude (because you achieved your goal or because it’s not the right time for
the work). Take time to appreciate everyone’s contributions and celebrate what
was learned.
• If you conclude it’s not the right time for the work, document what you learned
and share it with teams that might continue the work at another time.
IHI TOOL: QI Project Management
Institute for Healthcare Improvement • ihi.org 4
Strategy Ideas to Try My Next Steps
Make it easy, and focus on
learning, not perfection
IHI likes to say everyone has two jobs —
to do your work and to improve your
work — yet the reality is that
improvement work is often done in
addition to day-to-day work.
The tips and tools shared here aspire to
make improvement work easy, efficient,
meaningful, and fun (especially
meetings!) for the team.
Additionally, at the beginning of an
improvement project, focus on learning
quickly so that you can make progress
faster. This includes keeping your aim,
measures, and changes flexible; trying
to scale‐down tests and data collection;
and ensuring that the project work is
designed to help the team understand
what it takes to bring about
improvement that is not focused on
research or accountability.
• Keep improvement team meetings short by using a standard agenda that runs
through key points.
• Use existing meetings, structures, and one-to-one check-ins to do
improvement work, including data collection. Look for opportunities to swap
existing meetings or work for improvement team time and work.
• Reflect on how to “make it easy and successful” for the team, discussing
successful and unsuccessful past projects and asking the team to anticipate
barriers using a force field analysis.
• Make improvement team meetings fun and meaningful, including
incorporating stories of impact, music, and energizers. Try starting meetings
by asking each person to share one good thing.
• Develop a theory of improvement (e.g., create a driver diagram). An incorrect
theory gives the team more learning than having no theory at all. Refer back to
your theory regularly; as you learn, the theory should change, as should your
work and effort to align with the modified theory.
• Predict the percentage each driver contributes to your theory (e.g., driver 1 will
have a 20% impact, driver 2 a 50% impact, etc.); revise these predictions as
you test and learn to track the contribution of various efforts toward achieving
your improvement aim.
• Remain curious and willing to be surprised and to change your efforts as you
learn.
• Do everything “in pencil” to encourage change based on learning throughout
the project: use flipcharts, sticky notes, and whiteboards instead of lamination
or slides. People are more likely to be open to ideas and give feedback when the
“product” doesn’t feel final.
• “Step-down” to learn quickly. Look for opportunities to accelerate learning
with small tests (e.g., testing with one person this afternoon instead of 20
people next week).
• Collect data that’s “good enough” to drive improvement, not “exquisitely
precise” or “official” data that costs a lot and delays your need to test and act.
Use sampling to avoid survey fatigue and accelerate learning (e.g., send 10
different staff members a three-question survey every week rather than all 40
staff members a survey every month).
IHI TOOL: QI Project Management
Institute for Healthcare Improvement • ihi.org 5
Strategy Ideas to Try My Next Steps
Start with the end in mind
So often teams make great progress and
achieve great results during the
improvement project, but unfortunately
can discover months later that their
good work hasn’t “stuck.” Even when
you are just beginning an improvement
project, it is important to start with the
end in mind — plan for scale-up of
improvements early on and make sure
projects are set up to sustain those
improvements over time.
• Ensure those staff who will own the work long-term are engaged in the
improvement efforts from the beginning.
• Use visuals (e.g., run charts, storyboards) to share progress and information in
common, visible areas.
• Ask a diverse set of individuals to help with or shadow PDSAs.
• Find appropriate venues to begin telling compelling stories about the work.
• Invite other staff who will implement and scale-up the improvements in the
future to shadow the work. Share stories of “hard-won” lessons that you don’t
want them to have to learn themselves, in addition to successes.
• If you achieved your improvement aim by the defined end date, set up a 30-,
60-, and 90-day plan to close out the project work. Decide which measures you
will continue to track over time at some frequency to monitor that the gains
made during the improvement effort are sustained.
Additional IHI Resources
• How to Improve: Forming the Team; Setting Aims; Establishing Measures; Selecting, Testing, and Implementing Changes
• Quality Improvement Essentials Toolkit
• Scoville R, Little K, Rakover J, Luther K, Mate K. Sustaining Improvement. IHI White Paper. Cambridge, MA: Institute for Healthcare Improvement; 2016.
• WIHI: Five Practical Strategies for Managing Successful Improvement Projects (June 2016 recorded audio program)