Developed by the American Nurses Association (ANA), the National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators® (NDNQI®), a leading nursing quality improvement program, became a part of Press Ganey’s solutions.

 

By providing a wide database for examining relationships between nursing and patient outcomes, NDNQI delivers evidence to support the importance of investments in nursing strategy. It advances the vital efforts of nursing to help achieve higher quality, more coordinated care through a robust database of nursing-sensitive quality indicators and leading job satisfaction and practice environment Registered Nurses (RN) surveys.

 

More than 2,000 U.S. hospitals and 98% of Magnet recognized facilities participate in the NDNQI program, demonstrating the value of nurses in promoting high quality, patient-centered care.


Transforming Data into Quality Care

NDNQI is recognized as the gold standard in collecting, analyzing, comparing and reporting unit-based nursing sensitive quality indicators. With powerful unit-level data, NDNQI enables action-planning and intervention for specific units needing improvement.

 

It features nursing-sensitive structure, process and outcomes measures to monitor relationships between quality indicators and outcomes, including 18 nursing-sensitive quality indicators.

 


Understanding Nurses Needs

Nurses must be at the forefront of the mission to reduce suffering and deliver patient-centered care. Their valuable input is generated annually by Press Ganey’s NDNQI RN Survey that captures the voice of more than 300,000 nurses to provide hospitals with insights to drive engagement with those directly responsible for the patient experience. These insights can help anticipate costly nursing turnover and improve organizational culture.

 

The unit-level focus of the NDNQI RN Survey enables hospitals to develop more effective, finely targeted improvements. This type of unit-level examination of the details also helps hospitals understand the relationship between the clinical and staffing data and the RN survey data.

 

Road to Magnet Recognition

Press Ganey worked collaboratively with the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) to support the 2014 Magnet Guidelines and ensure content coverage of the seven nursing satisfaction categories required for Exemplary Practice Evidence of Outcomes.

This solution offers organizations the ability to:


Quarterly data submissions on nurse-sensitive quality indicators are advantageous to Magnet requirements


NDNQI nursing-sensitive measures are in compliance with the Magnet Recognition Program


Health care organizations can utilize the benchmarked nursing satisfaction data to fulfill the requirements of the Magnet Recognition Program


How NDNQI Helps?

NDNQI Provides Actionable Data to identify problem areas, explore possible causes, and monitor the effects of your improvement plan.

Additional value adding resources are:

BENCHMARKING

Quarterly information stream of comparison data for like facilities

TIMELY REPORTS

Your hospital will receive your report, including comparison data and analysis in a timely manner.

UNIT LEVEL DATA

Patient outcome and nurse staffing data are currently collected on various unit levels.

RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES

You can be part of the development process by pilot testing a new indicator and in validity and reliability studies.

TRENDING

NDNQI offers the ability to trend data over multiple quarters instead of an isolated, and perhaps misleading, snapshot of performance.

UNDERSTANDING SATISFACTION

Enables you to address the needs of your staff, improve work environment and retain valued nursing staff.

EDUCATION

NDNQI training modules are available including one on pressure ulcer identification, staging, and sourcing.

Indicators List

NDNQI allows organizations to track up to 18 nursing-sensitive quality measures to provide actionable insights based on structure, process and outcome data.


Proven Results

At least 30 years’ worth of research has consistently demonstrated a link between data-based quality improvement initiatives and patient outcomes. Leading health care organizations have recognized, listened and further promoted the voice of their nursing staff as a critical component of care to consistently achieve high-quality patient outcomes. If the nurses feel engaged, empowered and satisfied with their working environment, the patients are more likely to do well, too.


Reporting System

NDNQI program has a user-friendly web-based data entry and comprehensive tutorials, and no software purchase is needed.

Once the data entry is complete and analyzed, you will have:


The ability to drill-down and pinpoint your most promising improvement priorities


A click away access to investigate performance details from the service-level to the breakout level


Benchmark reports for each measure


Comparative data at the unit level, unit type, and hospital characteristics such as bed size, teaching status, hospital type, and Magnet status


Easy-to-understand performance graphics