Value-Based PaymentWhat Does It Mean for Nurses?Patricia Pittman, PhD, FAAN;Betty Rambur, PhD, RN, FAAN; Susan Birch, MBA, RN;Garrett K. Chan, PhD, APRN, FAEN, FPCN, FCNS, FNAP, FAAN;Cindy Cooke, DNP, FNP-C, FAANP;Mollie Cummins, PhD, RN, FAAN, FACMI;Colleen Leners, DNP, APRN, FAAN, FAANP;Lisa Kane Low, PhD, RN, CNM, FACNM, FAAN;Mikki Meadows-Oliver, PhD, MHP, PNP-BC, RN;Mona Shattell, PhD, RN, FAAN;Cheryl Taylor, PhD, RN, FAAN;Deborah Trautman, PhD, RN, FAANAmong the many lessons that have been reinforced by the SARS-COVID-19 pandemic is the failureof our current fee-for-service health care system to either adequately respond to patient needsor offer financial sustainability. This has enhanced bipartisan interest in moving forward withvalue-based payment reforms. Nurses have a rich history of innovative care models that speakto their potential centrality in delivery system reforms. However, deficits in terms of educationalpreparation, and in some cases resistance, to considering cost alongside quality, has hindered theprofession’s contribution to the conversation about value-based payments and their implicationsfor system change. Addressing this deficit will allow nurses to more fully engage in redesigninghealth care to better serve the physical, emotional, and economic well-being of this nation. Italso has the potential to unleash nurses from the tethers of a fee-for-service system where theyhave been relegated to a labor cost and firmly locate nurses in a value-generating role. Nurseadministrators and educators bear the responsibility for preparing nurses for this next chapter ofnursing.Key words:alternative payment models, health workforce, nurses, value-based care,value-based paymentAuthor Affiliations:The George WashingtonUniversity, Washington, District of Columbia (DrPittman); The University of Rhode Island, Kingston(Dr Rambur); Washington State Health CareAuthority, Olympia (Ms Birch); HealthImpact andthe University of California, San Francisco (DrChan); University of Mary, Bismarck, North Dakota(Dr Cooke); The University of Utah, Salt Lake City(Dr Cummins); American Association of Colleges ofNursing, Washington, District of Columbia (DrsLeners and Trautman); University of Michigan, AnnArbor (Dr Low); Quinnipiac University, Hamden,Connecticut (Dr Meadows-Oliver); Johns HopkinsUniversity, Baltimore, Maryland (Dr Shattell); andSouthern University and A & M College, BatonRouge, Louisiana (Dr Taylor).The authors are members of the American Associa-tion of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) Health Policy Ad-visory Committee (HPAC), HPAC lead staff, and AACNTHE YEAR 2020 heralded a time of dra-matic change, causing many Americansto reassess their values and way of life. So-cial injustice, polarized politics, and environ-mental disasters combined with the novelpresident. The article represents the views of authorsand does not necessarily represent AACN’s officialviews. One of the authors is a member of the MedicarePayment Advisory Commission (MedPAC). The articledoes not necessarily represent MedPAC.The authors declare no conflict of interest.Correspondence:Patricia Pittman, PhD, FAAN, TheGeorge Washington University, 2175 K St, Suite 200,NW, Washington, DC 20052 (ppittman@gwu.edu).DOI: 10.1097/NAQ.0000000000000482Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.179
180    NURSINGADMINISTRATIONQUARTERLY/JULY–SEPTEMBER2021SARS-COVID-19 pandemic, which has hadgrave health and economic consequences.Many health care organizations furloughedhealth care workers, including nurses,1evenas other settings strained to meet the surgein SARS-COVID-19 patients. In addition, therecord levels of business closures and resul-tant unemployment have meant that an es-timated 14.6 million people lost employer-based insurance in just the first few monthsof the pandemic.2This confluence of events has resulted ina growing recognition that US health care,already the most expensive in the world, ispoorly designed to meet the health, social,and economic challenges of 2020. In partic-ular, the pandemic laid bare the widespreadand systemic nature of health inequities in theUnited States and brought to light the real-ity of chronically underfunded public healthinfrastructure.At the heart of this failed system is fee-for-service (FFS) reimbursement, whereby eachintervention, action, or service is financiallycompensated. Fee-for-service reimbursementis a major reason for the mismatch betweenneeded services and their availability, as wellas the tragic paradox of overtreatment and un-dertreatment in the United States. Under FFSreimbursement, providers are financially re-warded for thevolumeof services provided,regardless if that service hasvaluein the formof favorable outcomes. Similarly, as we haveseen during the pandemic, hospitals are ex-cessively reliant on elective procedures, par-ticularly, the most intensive and expensiveones, for financial sustainability. This empha-sis on census volume and surgery-based proce-dures as leading sources of income for hospi-tal systems has made the value of nursing caredependent on these distorted missions, ratherthan on the important areas of proven nursevalue, such as preventing never events, pres-sure ulcers, falls with injuries, and so forth.These years of perverse financial incentives,and the recognition that the skewed invest-ments in health and social spending are mak-ing it difficult to compete globally, have led toa realization that we must move to value-basedpayments (VBPs), and COVID-19 has magni-fied the need to keep moving in this direc-tion. Given how little the 2 major US politicalparties agree upon, it is encouraging that VBPreforms have widespread bipartisan support.Calls for payment reforms that emphasizevalue over volume have emerged amid mount-ing evidence of the problem of low-value careand waste in the United States, with stud-ies consistently finding 25% to 30% of careto be wasteful,3or roughly $1 trillion peryear. While this waste is realized as incometo providers, it comes at a steep price forour nation as a whole. Taxpayers contributesubstantially through the cost of governmen-tal insurance (Medicare, Medicaid, CHIPS, Tri-care). The expense is also borne by work-ers who receive health insurance throughtheir employer. Given cost shifting, employer-based insurance functions as a hidden tax onemployees. Moreover, employers are increas-ingly adopting insurance plans with high costsharing, leaving consumers with increasingcopayments and deductibles.In response to evidence of waste, a varietyof waste-reducing programs have been insti-tuted, and more programs are anticipated. TheTable describes some of the main characteris-tics of FFS reimbursement, episode-based pay-ment such as bundled payment, population-based payment such as Accountable CareOrganizations, and advanced primary caremodels. These, together with programs suchas Hospital Value-Based Purchasing, attemptto better align the case for quality with eco-nomic incentives. Based on experience todate with various models, the federal govern-ment is currently most interested in alterna-tive payment models that are mandatory, suchas some bundled payment programs, and in-corporating a downside risk for providers aswell as the upside savings elements.5DEVELOPING NURSING’S RESPONSE TOVBPsFor nursing, the question that has been dis-cussed for some time now is “what will pay-ment reform based on value mean for theevolving role of different types of nurses?”In theory, VBPs should mean that nurses willCopyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Value-Based Payment181Table.Payment Models and Their IncentivesPaymentmodelFee for service:Singlepayment pereach servicewith noproviderfinancial riskor definedoutcomeaccountabilityEpisode-basedpayments(bundledpayments):Single lump sumreimbursementacross entireepisode of care(hospitalization,rehospitaliza-tion,procedures,post–acute care,readmissions,medications,devices, etc)Population-basedpayments(Medicare SharedSavings Programand NextGenerationAccountable CareOrganizations):Payments basedon cost andoutcomes of care,with incrementalmove toward risksharing and riskbearingAdvanced primarycare models(ComprehensivePrimary Care Plusand Primary CareFirst-Gen): Morecare managementfees on a PMPMbasis and optionof shifting fromFFS to capitatedpayments)Incentives   Incentivizesincreased useof resourceswithoutconsiderationof cost orvalueIncentivizes (1)carecoordination,(2) adoption ofbest practices,and (3)meticulousdischargeplanningPotentiallyincentivizeshigh-valuenoninterventioncare (eg, watchfulwaiting) andnurse-ledcare/chronicconditionmanagement.Incentive fornoninterventioncare parallels theamount of risksharing and ishighest in full riskbearingIncentivizesdiversification ofcare team withemphasis onoutreach andprevention andunder capitationpotentiallyenhanceseconomic stabilityas well as risk forprovidersAbbreviations: FFS, fee for service; PMPM, per member per month.have an opportunity to decrease unnecessaryand low-value care and enhance efficiencyand effectiveness in ways that advance thehealth and well-being of our nation. Value-based nursing knowledge has the potential toreshape the delivery system to address up-stream social determinants of health, coor-dinate care across the continuum, and pro-vide services in the least restrictive and leastexpensive environment. These advancementsare key to addressing the 3 major challengesour nation faces as we gain control of the pan-demic: behavioral health disorders, chronicdiseases (including a possible COVID-19 syn-drome), and the undeniable racial and ethnicdisparities that have been historically ignoredby the health care system.Nurses are not new to delivery systeminnovations.  The  American  Academy  ofNursing Edge Runner Series, for example, hasdocumented more than 60 models of carethat are evidence-base, nurse-designed caremodels that span a broad array of programtype, populations, and settings (seehttps://www.aannet.org/initiatives/edge-runners/initiativesedge-runnersprofiles-by-focusforfull list). These notable models illustratenursing’s capacity to improve health careCopyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
182    NURSINGADMINISTRATIONQUARTERLY/JULY–SEPTEMBER2021quality, enhance people’s satisfaction withcare, and lower cost. Specific ways in whichnurses offer value that can inform healthsystems response to new payment modelsinclude the following:Complex careThe Complex Care Center is a nurse-ledmodel that focuses on the most complex pa-tients by mentoring and maximizing exist-ing resources in their circle of care. It linksproviders in the context of a patient care planand includes social determinants of health,such as housing, transportation, financial bar-riers, or mental health/trauma. Importantly,this approach aims to change the system,rather than just patients’ behavior. In a studyof 1000 patients, over 12 months, the modelresulted in greater than 40% reduction in inpa-tient admissions and emergency departmentvisits, a $1 million improvement in the operat-ing margin, and a 23% return on investment.6Midwifery-based maternity careMany large purchasers on the West Coastare using new models of bundled maternitycare based on certified nurse midwives anddoulas. The aim is to reduce the overmedical-ization, including the reduction of cesarian de-liveries, and to improve patient engagement.The Pacific Business Group on Health devel-oped a blueprint for action that outlines strate-gies to increase access to midwifery services.7Nurse-to-nurse modeling transitions incareThe  transition  to  Vermont’s  All-PayerModel, a statewide accountable care organi-zation (ACO) modeled after Next GenerationAccountable Care Organizations but inclusiveof Medicaid and commercial insurance,8ledone small rural hospital to reconceptualizeits role to include the concept of an “Ac-countable Community.” Guided by a commu-nity board, this largely nurse-led initiative in-corporates a whole person, whole life ori-entation that includes transitional care nurs-ing, community health teams, a program thattrains nursing assistants to detect changesin people’s conditions to reduce hospitaliza-tions, home safety, and a broad complementof health professionals and paraprofession-als. In addition to a wide array of positivehealth and patient satisfaction outcomes, theteam reports a 56% reduction in hospitalreadmissions.9Home visits by nurse practitioners andregistered nursesTheHuntsmanatHomeprojectatUtah’sHuntsman Cancer Institute, for example, usednurse practitioners to deliver acute-level treat-ment to patients with cancer in their ownhomes. A robust evaluation study of more than300 patients showed substantial reductionsin unplanned hospitalizations, total lengthof hospital stay, and health care costs forhospital-at-home patients compared with theusual care comparison group.10Public health nursingOur nation’s public health nurses play acritical role in advancing the health of pop-ulations through prevention, health promo-tion, and emergency preparedness, includingresponse to epidemics such as SARS-CoV-2. A2008 Robert Wood Johnson report indicatedthat fully 25% of the nation’s public healthworkforce consists of nurses.11Telehealth and mHealthTechnologies for remote sensing and com-munication through telehealth and mHealth(mobile and wireless technologies) hold greatpotential to improve access to care for peo-ple living in rural and underserved areasand to ameliorate rural and ethnic/minorityhealth disparities.12They are often deliv-ered by nurses, and the expansion of thesetechnologies, and more recently, the expan-sion of payment for these services duringthe COVID-19 pandemic has created an abun-dance of opportunities for nursing to providehealth care that can improve outcomes atlower cost.13Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Value-Based Payment183Across and beyond these models, studiesare emerging that describe how VBPs couldlead health care organizations and payers tosee nursing expertise differently. Several stud-ies describe nurses being “activated” in newroles and new jobs, as well as the idea that allteam members (nurse support staff included)must be called upon to practice to the full ex-tent of their education and license.14-16Thereis also some evidence that VBPs lead to aprogressive shift from reliance on physiciansto an expanded use of nurse practitionersand physician assistants in primary care, es-pecially in safety net settings, and in settingsthat have been accredited as primary caremedical homes.17Care coordination and caretransitions have become essential functionsfor hospitals and ACOs, and these roles areoften filled by nurses. In addition, the basisfor these programs is patient risk segmenta-tion and other big data analyses, an area oftenoverseen by a nurse serving as the director ofpopulation health.18THE COST PROBLEMWhile nurses, as individuals and as a pro-fession, have much to gain from the movetoward VBPs, there are structural, cognitive,and atavistic barriers to full adoption of value-based care by nurses. Structurally, nursesare often employed in settings with volume-driven health care, for example, hospitals.Cognitively, they have not been educationallyprepared to observe, critique, and correct fi-nancing and delivery mechanisms that drivelow-value, high-cost care. If value equals costand quality, while nurses are schooled in qual-ity, they have to start understanding cost andrisk sharing with payers. Finally, the deepestbarrier may be tied to nursing’s professionalidentity. Generations of nurses have been so-cialized to believe that their role is to focus onthe person directly in front of them and maxi-mize that person’s care; for many nurses, evenconsidering costs of care has sometimes beenviewed as unethical. The time has come tochange that mindset. It is critical for nursesto engage in the conversations about valueand to participate in and sometimes lead pro-cesses of delivery system change.Cost considerations are not inherentlygood or bad. Coupled with a focus on healthoutcomes, cost considerations are at the heartof value-based care and represent an es-sential corrective action.19Importantly, costconsideration does not inherently mean avoid-ance of expensive treatments but instead fo-cuses on the value-added health outcomethat is accomplished in response to thetreatment. Cost consideration also requirescomparison  to  other  treatment  options,including  the  often-ignored  approach  ofthoughtful and watchful waiting. Examplesabound where doing “less,” not “more,” isthe right approach, such as in maternity carewhere overuse of procedures such as cesareanbirth in low-risk pregnancies increases mor-bidity and mortality.20,21Given the magnitude of medical error inthe United States, calculated as the third lead-ing cause of death,22avoidance of unneces-sary and wasteful care is an urgent ethicalresponsibility. This central premise of healthcare ethics, nonmaleficence (“do no harm”),is paired with a more nuanced adoption ofbeneficence (“do good”—create a benefit).The best idea in the world cannot create abenefit if there is no way to pay for it.RECOMMENDATIONSTo address the resistance within nursing toincluding cost as an inherent element in thevalue proposition, and to enhance the roleof nurses as protagonists of systems reforms,nursing leadership must develop its own plan.The plan must attend closely to nurse ad-ministrators and nurse educators, roles thathold a particular responsibility for ensuringthat nursing is ready to contribute to thesechanges.Nurse administrators play a vital role inmaking the cost of care transparent to thehealth care team, but tracking costs is notsimple. One challenge is the difference be-tween the actual costs associated with careand supplies and what the health care agencyCopyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
184    NURSINGADMINISTRATIONQUARTERLY/JULY–SEPTEMBER2021charges patients and insurers. Furthermore,those charges are variable across payers. Alsocomplicating the landscape is the fact thatthe American Hospital Association has suedthe federal government to halt cost trans-parency requirements scheduled to go intoeffect from January 1, 2021, a lawsuit fed-eral judges rejected. However, solutions arerapidly developing.23Nurses can help their organizations de-velop programs that succeed in a cost-transparent, value-focused world. While weknow that people often do not understandhow, or have the time to seek out data onprices, they will be increasingly expected todo so.24As cost sharing increases and the USeconomy struggles, nurses can serve as pa-tient advocates by supporting the process ofbecoming more value-conscious. For this tooccur, nurses themselves must become morevalue-conscious and thinking that to do so isnot altruistic must be eliminated.The American Organization for NursingLeadership created competencies for nursemanagers,25nurse executives,26post–acutecare,27and system chief nurse executives28that include health care economics, value-based purchasing, revenue, and reimburse-ment. However, these competencies do notexplicitly include measurement of value, in-cluding cost, outcomes, and patient satis-faction. Nurse administrator education, con-tinuing education, and competencies couldaddress this gap by adding competencies re-lating to the measurement and acumen formanaging costs while increasing access andquality.There are also opportunities to leveragechange in the incumbent nurse workforcethrough performance improvement projectsthat seek improved patient satisfaction andcare outcomes, while reducing costs throughoperational improvements. One well-knownapproach is Lean, which focuses on the re-duction of 8 types of waste: waiting/idle time;inventory; defects; transportation of patients,supplies, and equipment; motion; overpro-duction; overprocessing, and untapped hu-man potential.29In calculating the reductionof waste, nurses may need additional train-ing in cost analyses. Regardless, of the ap-proach, nurses’ professional associations andorganizations could design and offer continu-ing education modules for credit nationwideto inform the current nurse workforce (frompublic health nurses to nurse practitionersand hospital-based nurses) of the complexity,models, and benefits of value-based care.Among nurse educators, there are alsodeficits. Most have not been systematicallyprepared to analyze and reform care pro-cesses to enhance value. This makes it difficultto lead curricular redesign and student learn-ing. A nationwide “educate the educators”workshop series that laces health economics,policy and payment reform, and workforcedevelopment, as well as the ethical imperativeof addressing costs, would be an importantfirst step toward a more equitable and sus-tainable US health system. Optimally, thesesessions would include nurse administratorswho can help educators understand the com-plexity of leading in systems that have an arrayof payment models, each with different—andsometimes competing—financial incentives.This backdrop would optimally catalyzebaccalaureate and practice doctorate compe-tencies that support care redesign, system in-novation, and value-conscious care. The fun-damental challenge of this reorientation ofbaccalaureate education should not be un-derestimated. Many nursing programs havea disproportionate amount of education inhospital and other traditional settings, wherenovices learn to execute orders, includingstanding orders, rather than to evaluate, cri-tique, and redesign. There is inadequate atten-tion to population health and health systems.Ideally, a new baccalaureate graduate wouldbe asked in his or her job interview aboutwhat ideas he or she might have to help pre-vent unnecessary hospitalizations, improveoutcomes in post–acute care, or more gen-erally contribute to a risk-bearing ACO, or anurse-based bundled payment program.The doctor of nursing practice educationtypically incorporates more content on sys-tems redesign and the triple/quadruple aimCopyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Value-Based Payment185inclusive of cost and better outcomes. How-ever, more can be done, beginning with anaudit by faculty to ensure that value-basedpractice skills are built progressively through-out the curriculum.CONCLUSIONValue-based care has the potential to un-leash nurses from the tethers of an FFS sys-tem that has relegated them to a labor cost,as opposed to a revenue generator. In all-inclusive total cost-of-care models, the mostobverse model from FFS reimbursement, allhealth services—regardless if delivered byphysicians, nurses, or physical therapists—are costs. This shift is critical to nursing’sprofessional security, because when financialtimes are tough and cost reductions needed,as we have seen again in 2020, labor is thefirst area targeted. Nurses lose jobs. But moreimportantly, the change is critical to the mis-sion of nursing as a profession, in particular,itscommitmenttoaddressingnotjustindi-vidual patients’ needs but understanding andaddressing health and health care in the con-text of family, community, and the social de-terminants of health.We know that an aging society, like theUnited States, is desperately in need of care-based models (nursing), rather than dispro-portionately cure-based strategies, such assurgery and invasive interventions. Similarly,we know that mental health and substanceabuse disorder, complex chronic diseases,and the growing health disparities cannotbe adequately addressed with a simple medi-cal cure. Public health, upstream, and otherwraparound approaches are needed to ad-dress these problems. Value-based care, whenproperly implemented, provides an opportu-nity for nurses to enhance the role of nurs-ing care and to help redesign the health caredelivery system to better serve the physical,emotional, and economic well-being of thisnation. Nurse administrators and educatorsbear the responsibility for preparing nursesfor this next chapter of nursing.REFERENCES1. Gooch K. Record number of healthcare workerslaid off, furloughed during pandemic.Becker’s Hos-pital Review. https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/workforce/record-number-of-healthcare-workers-laid-off-furloughed-during-pandemic.html.Published June 5, 2020. Accessed November 4,2020.2. Fronstin P, Woodbury S. How many have lost jobswith employer coverage during the pandemic.Com-monwealth  Foundation.  https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/issue-briefs/2020/oct/how-many-lost-jobs-employer-coverage-pandemic.Published October 7, 2020. Accessed November 4,2020.3. Shrank WH, Rogstad TL, Parekh N. Waste in UShealth care system. Estimated costs and poten-tial for savings.JAMA. 2019;322(15):1501-1509.doi:10.1001/jama.2019.13978.4. Berwick DM, Hackbarth AD. Eliminating waste inUS health care [published online ahead of printMarch 14, 2012].JAMA. 2012;307(14):1513-1516.doi:10.1001/jama.2012.362.5. Spanko A. Verma: alternative payment model per-formance “deeply concerning,” more mandatoryprograms ahead.Skilled Nursing News. https://skillednursingnews.com/2020/10/verma-alternative-payment-model-performance-deeply-concerning-more-mandatory-programs-ahead/. Published Octo-ber 15, 2020. Accessed November 4, 2020.6. Hardin L. Complex Care Center, American Academyof Nursing Edge Runners. https://www.aannet.org/initiatives/edge-runners/profiles/edge-runners–complex-care-center.  Published  2015.  AccessedNovember 4, 2020.7. Pacific Business Group on Health. Transform ma-ternity care.https://www.pbgh.org/maternity.Pub-lished November 10, 2020. Accessed April 27, 2021.8. Backus E, Gobeille A, Hogan C, Holmes J., RamburB. The All—Payer Accountable Care Organization:an opportunity for Vermont and exemplary forthe nation.Health Affairs Blog. http://healthaffairs.org/blog/2016/11/22/the-all-payer-accountable-care-organization-model-an-opportunity-for-vermont-and-an-exemplar-for-the-nation/.  Published  November22, 2016. Accessed April 22, 2021.9. Allard BL, Accountable community of health. EdgeRunner, American Academy of Nursing. https://www.aannet.org/initiatives/edge-runners/profiles/edge-runners–accountablecommunity.   Published2015. Accessed November 4, 2020.10. Mooney K, Titchener K, Haaland B, et al. Theoncology hospital at home: health care utilizationCopyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
186    NURSINGADMINISTRATIONQUARTERLY/JULY–SEPTEMBER2021outcomes  from  the  Huntsman  at  Home  trial.J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(suppl):2020. doi:10.1200/JCO.2020.38.15_suppl.7000.11. Fauteux N. Strengthening public health nursing—part 1.Charting Nursing’s Future. https://www.rwjf.org/en/library/research/2008/09/cnf-strengthening-ph-nursing-part-one.html. Published 2008. Ac-cessed November 4, 2020.12. Probst JC, Moore CG, Glover SH, Samuels ME.Person and place: the compounding effects ofrace/ethnicity and rurality on health.Am J PublicHealth. 2004;94(10):1695-1703.13. Sullivan DH. Technological advances in nursing caredelivery.Nurs Clin North Am. 2015;50(4):663-677.doi:10.1016/j.cnur.2015.07.005.14. Buerhaus PI, DesRoches CM, Dittus R, DonelanK. Practice characteristics of primary care nursepractitioners  and  physicians.Nurs  Outlook.2015;63(2)144-153. doi:10.1016/j.outlook.2014.08.008.15. Fraher E, Spetz J, Naylor M. Nursing in a trans-formed health care system: new roles, new rules.Robert Wood Johnson Foundation InterdisciplinaryNursing  Quality  Research  Initiative.  https://ldi.upenn.edu/sites/default/files/pdf/inqri-ldi-brief-nursing.pdf. Published 2015. Accessed November24, 2018.16. Pittman P, Forrest E. The changing role of RNs inPioneer ACOs.Nurs Outlook. 2015;63(5):554-565.17. Park J, Wu X, Frogner BK, Pittman P. Does the patient-centered medical home model change staffing andutilization in the community health centers?MedCare. 2018;56(9):784-790.18. Erikson C, Pittman P, LaFrance A, Chapman S. Al-ternative payment models lead to strategic care co-ordination workforce investments.Nurs Outlook.2017;65(4):1-9.19. Institute of Medicine (US) Roundtable on Value &Science-Driven Health Care. In: Yong PL, Olsen L,McGinnis JM, eds.Value in Health Care: Account-ing for Cost, Quality, Safety, Outcomes, and Inno-vation. Washington, DC: The National AcademiesPress; 2010.20. Armstrong J, Kozhimanni K, McDermott P, SaadeG, Srinivas S. Comparing variation in hospital ratesof cesarean delivery among low-risk women us-ing three different measures.Am J Obstet Gynecol.2015;214(2):53-163.21. Jolles DR. Unwarranted variation in utilization of ce-sarean birth among low-risk childbearing women.J Midwifery Womens Health. 2017;62(1):49-57.doi:10.1111/jmwh.12565.22. Makary MA, Daniel M. Medical error-the third lead-ing cause of death in the US.BMJ. 2016;353:i2139.doi:10.1136/bmj.i2139.23. Kawamoto K, Martin CJ, Williams K, et al. ValueDriven Outcomes (VDO): a pragmatic, modular,and extensible software framework for understand-ing and improving health care costs and out-comes [published online ahead of print October 16,2014].JAmMedInformAssoc. 2015;22(1):223-235.doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2013-002511.24. Mehrota A, Dean K, Sinaiko A, Sood N. Americanssupport price shopping for health care, but few ac-tually seek out price information.Health Aff.2017;36(8):1392-1400. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2016.1471.25. American  Organization  for  Nursing  Leadership(AONL).Nurse Manager Competencies.Chicago, IL:AONE, AONL; 2015.26. American  Organization  for  Nursing  Leadership(AONL).Nurse Executive Competencies.Chicago,IL: AONE, AONL; 2015.27. American  Organization  for  Nursing  Leadership(AONL).Nurse Executive Competencies: Post-AcuteCare. Chicago, IL: AONE, AONL; 2015.28. American  Organization  for  Nursing  Leadership(AONL).Nurse Executive Competencies: SystemCNE. Chicago, IL: AONE, AONL; 2015.29. NEJM Catalyst. What is Lean in healthcare? Mas-sachusetts Medical Society.https://catalyst.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/CAT.18.0193. Published April27, 2018. Retrieved November 4, 2020