Guest Editorial John M. Welton
What’s a Nurse’s Value? Making Cents of Care
I
magine if, at the end of a shift,
every nurse wrote out a bill for
the care he or she just delivered. What would be on the
bill and how much would each
nurse charge? It is a provocative
question and gets to the heart of
how to measure the added value
nurses bring to the health care system. I have asked that question
many times over the years. One
place I recall was a hospital cardiac
care unit where I was touring the
unit with the nurse manager. I
asked the billing question to a preceptor orienting a young nurse. She
went through her own patients,
one patient with routine congestive
heart failure and another with complex dysrhythmia, and described
the various things that would be included on her
patient bills. She looked at the new nurse, smiled,
and said she would charge more than her. It was a
sobering reminder of the different types of experiences and expertise nurses bring to the bedside and
the challenge to measure the value of each nurse.
The Value of Each Nurse
We struggle with the question: what is good nursing care? Common answers include reduction or
elimination of nurse-sensitive quality measures such
as injuries, infections, and pressure ulcers. Indeed,
Florence Nightingale extolled over 150 years ago: “If
a patient is cold, if a patient is feverish, if a patient is
faint, if he is sick after taking food, if he has a bedsore, it is generally the fault not of the disease, but of
the nursing” (Nightingale, 1860). The actions of nurses as well as many others caring for the sick and
injured have a direct effect on the outcomes of care.
However, there is a more personal question: who is a
“good” nurse and what are his or her characteristics
and virtues?
If nursing is measured as the collective efforts of
all nurses caring for all patients within a particular
setting, how can we distinguish the individual contribution of each nurse? How would we measure perJOHN M. WELTON, PhD, RN, FAAN, is Professor and Senior
Scientist, Health Systems Research, University of Colorado,
College of Nursing, Aurora, CO, and Guest Editor for this issue of
Nursing Economics.
formance and outcomes of care and
then provide positive feedback to
help promote a professional environment to allow each nurse to
achieve his or her very best effort?
The question is both timely and
relevant as we move toward wider
implementation of value-based
care.
Measuring Nursing Value
In a recent article in Nursing
Economic$, a group of nurses and
others engaged in a national expert
panel proposed a method to measure nursing care value (Welton &
Harper, 2016). The model identifies
key data elements in the electronic
health care record to link a nurse
and patient as well as identify characteristics of that encounter. For example, a shift
assignment in an acute care setting links each nurse
and patient. From these data one could measure the
workload based on patient acuity or the effects of the
experience or academic preparation of each nurse in
relationship to the outcomes of care for each patient.
By linking nurses to patients in many different
settings, we can also determine the actual hours of
care delivered and, if a wage is available, calculate
the actual or “true” direct nursing cost of patient care.
This is relevant as we move toward bundled payment
models. Future nursing care delivery models will
require more accurate cost metrics to better understand the added value of nurses.
Recommendations
Where do nurses fit in the overall value equation? As we move forward with health care reform,
that answer lies not in measuring nursing care as a
composite whole, but as the aggregate of the contribution of each individual nurse. That will require
changes in how we measure care toward the performance, costs, and quality of the care provided by each
nurse. That raises difficult questions about how to
compare or benchmark the care of nurses across different patients and different settings. What if a nurse
is not doing well in managing a patient’s pain or giving medication on time? What if the most costly nurses are caring for the least complex or acute patients?
How will nurses respond as greater accountability for
continued on page 81
NURSING ECONOMIC$/March-April 2016/Vol. 34/No. 2
sages that need to be conveyed to
the profession, public, and politicians. It’s not always about only
using hard numbers; it is often
about describing the difference it
will make for their citizens and
especially those located in the
harder-to-reach parts of the state.
If we do not get the public to
engage in the process, if we do not
get the politicians to understand
the importance, and if we do not
have the profession behind us,
then research funding will go to
other priorities with louder voices. Making research results accessible, understood, and supported
by a wide range of stakeholders is
a critical step in retaining and
increasing research investment.
A New Era of Regulation
DN: What keeps you up at
night?
DB: As regulators, we are running to catch up. Change within
service delivery is rapid. The regulatory framework we are currently using was designed for an era
that is rapidly disappearing. We’re
seeing more technology and,
therefore, we need to think about
how we protect the public in what
is a very dynamic and fast-changing environment. The demographics of both health workers and
nurses are changing. How do we
regulate in such a climate? We are
entering a new era of regulation
and we need to consider how we
will protect citizens in a way that
fits 21st century practice.
We also need to be mindful a
generation of children will have a
shorter life expectancy than their
parents due to the rapid increase
of noncommunicable diseases and
obesity-related issues. We need to
think about preventative strategies
rather than treatment strategies.
What does that mean for the educational curriculum and how we
supervise practice? We also need
to make sure nurses themselves
are healthy.
Another pressing issue is the
ability to rapidly respond and deploy nurses in natural disasters.
Failure to provide solutions
means public safety is at risk. As
regulators, addressing public safety is our prime purpose.
DN: Where do you want to
make your greatest impact and
what would you like to be known
for at NCSBN?
DB: A former chief executive
of Ikea said one of the things that
had made his company a success
was the ability to steal good ideas
with pride rather than waste time
reinventing the wheel. When they
see good ideas they consider them
carefully and figure out how to
utilized them. There are a lot really good practices in the 50 states.
We should take those examples of
best practice and align them to our
particular context. It is not about
blindly accepting them and transplanting them but aligning them
Guest Editorial
continued from page 57
to our reality and implementing
them with vigor. If we can learn
from each other and implement
those ideas proven successful
elsewhere rather than reinventing
the wheel, I will be happy.
We need to be architects of our
future and shift the curve. It’s not
about looking for the one or two
failures and dealing with them, it’s
about seeing how we shift the
whole curve so we all succeed and
make excellence of practice a reality for all. It is possible if we all
pull together. $
REFERENCE
Conover, C., & Richards, R. (2015).
Economic benefits of less restrictive
regulation of advanced practice nurses in North Carolina. Nursing
Outlook, 63(5), 585-592. doi:10.
1016/j.outlook. 2015.05.009
a range of new outcomes measures are implemented and placed on each
nurse?
To answer these questions, the following must occur:
1. Produce new methods to extract common data from the electronic
health record at the individual encounter between a nurse and
patient to provide key information about cost, quality, performance,
payment, and clinical care.
2. Reconfigure internal costing and billing systems to separate nursing
care and charge for nursing care directly to each patient rather than
standardize room and board or other average methods.
3. Recommend each nurse apply for National Provider Identifier (NPI)
code. Use NPI in all interactions of nurses and patients.
If these recommendations are implemented, we will have the ability
to identify the added value each nurse brings to patient care. This represents a fundamental shift in how nursing care is viewed. Individual
accountability, assessment of performance at the individual nurse level,
and allocation of direct care time and costs of each nurse to each patient
will provide the links to quality and outcomes of care. We have the ability to implement these recommendations in the next few years. Is there
political will and consensus within the nursing community to move forward with these recommendations? Failure to take ownership of the data
and metrics to link nurses to value-based care will likely lead to imposition of nursing value metrics from outside the profession. We are at a
crossroad and it is time to challenge traditional views of nursing care
value.$
REFERENCES
Nightingale, F. (1860). Notes on nursing: What it is, and what it is not. New York, NY:
D. Appleton and Company.
Welton, J.M., & Harper, E.M. (2016). Measuring nursing care value. Nursing Economics,
34(1), 7-14.
NURSING ECONOMIC$/March-April 2016/Vol. 34/No. 2 81
Copyright of Nursing Economic$ is the property of Jannetti Publications, Inc. and its content
may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright
holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.